Ihave concentrated my exploration of utopia in this text on a concept presentedby Roland Barthes. Adding to the two poles of the binary - [utopia](utopia1.html) and the 'real world' - he introduces a third, the atopia. The atopia "issuperior to the utopia ... Utopias are static, within the binary; atopiais the movement that disturbs the binary. However the two are not separablein a distinct way, for it is only insofar as utopias are nonexistent andyet exist as such (that is, utopias can be thought but are by definitionwhat is not there), that there ensues the *movement* that is atopia." [[1]](notes.html) (myitalics). Looking at the binary system, one deals with "a two-term dialectic:popular opinion and its contrary, doxa and its paradox... This binary dialecticis the dialectic of meaning itself (marked/not marked)." [[2]](notes.html) As utopia is the ideal place, the place of non-describable happiness, Iwould like to equate it with the Barthesian term of *jouissance* (bliss,for the want of a better word). Equally, I would like to equate 'the realworld' (the 'ordinary' existence and what is possible in it) with the term *plaisir* for the clarification of relations. "What is *jouissance* , if not the 'unspeakable', which is notany-thing at all? Furthermore, it turns out that 'pleasure' [ *plaisir* ]here (and without being able to anticipate) sometimes extends to bliss [ *jouissance* ],sometimes is opposed to it. *Jouissance* is both a text and a nothing, *plaisir* is both itself and its other, *jouissance* . The effortto attain *jouissance* , which is finally the effort to escape the textof culture altogether, only succeeds in destabilizing both terms of theinitial *plaisir* / *jouissance* binary." [[3]](notes.html) So what is utopia, if not the unspeakable, which is not anything at all?'The real world' (without being able to anticipate) sometimes extends toutopia, sometimes is opposed to it. The effort to attain utopia, which isfinally the effort to escape the text of culture altogether, only succeedsin destabilizing both terms of the initial 'real world'/utopia binary. Utopia is "posed as that which would enable a definite escape fromthe cultural [from the fixity of the binary], while such an aim is undercutby a recognition of its own impossibility." [[4]](notes.html) Utopia is being thought, i.e. desired, and therefore conceptually constructedand as such it exists and does not exist an the same time. Utopia's doxa,the 'real world', must then assume the same degree of instability throughthe necessity of the binary character of the two terms utopia/'real world'. According to Barthes this is the point where the utopia transforms intothe atopia. "It [the atopia] exceeds the utopia that simply opposesthe doxa, for what is important is the space it can open up within the doxato the extent that it itself, a utopia (a nowhere), has no place - atopia(of drifting habitation)." [[5]](notes.html) The quest for utopia "is staged in its passage, but just as there isno one object on which it comes to rest, so there is no one [subject](butler.html) behind it." [[6]](notes.html)

<!-- 🖼️❌ Image not available. Please use `PdfPipelineOptions(generate_picture_images=True)` -->