###### Oliver Hockenhull

### ["It is out of the random thatorganisms collect new mutations , and it is there  that stochastic learning gathers itssolutions." - Gregory Bateson - Read to the end of this page before using links, there will be a butterfly landing at the bottom - in time. When I talked to the Native Media Artist Mike MacDonald about the odd flightof the butterfly he  told me it was the creature that he found mostdifficult to film in flight - he had no problem with birds, other animals or insects - but butterflies were socapricious. As we seek toarticulate solutions to the manifold problems of our times thedelicate and frenetic flight of a butterfly comes  to mind. The web of our newcapacities, the work of  a new fluid way of writing , of bounding our inscriptions into the water of ideas and images, dissolving ourcertainty into the living  poesis of association, analogy and an incompleteness that fulfilsour need for movement, for  the next note, for the next link . "Every worker dabbling in  artificial evolution has been struck by the easewith which  evolution produces the improbable.  'Evolution doesn't care about what makessense; it cares  about what works." - From Kevin Kelly's Out of Control -The New Biology of Machines , Social Systems, and the Economic World, 1994 - The eccentric flight of the butterflyis a parallel of its frailty as a creature.   Its unpredictable movement demonstrable of asurvival strategy of the fantastic. "The look forward becomes evenmore powerful the brighter it becomes aware of itself.   The dream in this look becomesquite clear, and the presentiment, being the right one, will  be obvious.  Only when reasonstarts to speak, then hope, which has nothing false to it, will  begin to blossom again. Thenot yet conscious itself has to become conscious of its own  doings; it must come to knowits contents as restraint and revelation." - Art and Utopia, Ernst Bloch, 1959- The butterfly's very existence projects an understanding and incorporation inthe world of  a rhythm beyond the rational and into the real of transformation and purevariability.   The butterfly is nature at a serendipity of extravagant flourish. Mr. MacDonald's video installation "Touched By The Tears ofa Butterfly", from  which we have recomposed for the web as "Butterfly Gardeningon The Net" is one  that surprises, in its simplicity, understatement, yet intenserealization.  I have been  and remain against the general idea of unadulterated realism, andespecially opposed to the filming or photographing of nature. Mechanical means tocapture an image from nature,  as an art, seems absurd to me.  But the work of MacDonaldspeaks through the images, the  myth of the butterfly, and the reality of the butterfly, it speaks an unencompassed silence with an eye that is patiently waiting. The images unfoldwithout haste, without noise, but  full of drama, beauty, colour, pathos.   The formalgestures, the placements of the work within the context of a gallery and now on the net reconstitutes a meaning, a relationship of complexitydemanding of silent attention. Its discarded past as a slow and earthboundcreature, the chrysalis of transformation  and its rebirth as thoroughly transformed is another aspect of its metaphoric value.   Here we acknowledgemetaphor as essential.  Metaphor as the gene pool of meaning  - as a liquid plan, as animpact of an unreasonable process and whose speculated out come is unpredictable,  is as theawakening to new being. "...he that will not apply new remedies mustexpect new evils: for time is the greatest  innovator; and if time of course alter things tothe worst, and wisdom and counsel shall  not alter them for the better, what shall be theend?" - Francis Bacon, -Of Innovations -, 1625. We live in a mind, thatmind is called nature.  It is an aggregate, ababel of texts,  a composition that plays useven as we may, apparently, at least for a time, ignore it.   The study of the impossibilityof a butterfly should humble us.   We should stand dumbfounded before its fact and drink thenectar of it as aquestion that answers our own terminal and fleeting life. "All that is not information , notredundancy, not form and not restraints is noise,  the only possible source of newpatterns." - Bateson, Mind and Nature - A Necessary Unity, 1979 - Livingknowledge is not purchased but revealed through submission. It bears repeating: "Tools are artefacts, but they are not in essence objects.  Since they qualitativelyincrease a species possibility of organising and controlling the matter-energy in theirecosystem, their primary characteristic is that of information.  They are forms thatinform; they are informed because they remember the past and make possible new types ofprojections into the future." Anthony Wilden, "System and Structure" To suppose that an ecology of communications exists presupposes that there is an evolution tocommunications.   That evolution is substantially one of co-evolution.  Human culture  is a product ofevolutionary strategies.  These primary tools of the human - art making, language, writing, - arethe essential mnemonic mechanisms of human biocultural evolution and ecology.  They arenot only the bees that pollinate the gardens of our minds, but have had and willcontinue to have a symbiotic relationship to the potential uses of our minds ways ofunderstanding. Ecology is not a homeostatic operation but the  complex dynamic ofevolutionary and syncretic potentialities. It is in this chrysalis oftransformation, encased and gestating -constrained  to the teleological of the necessity andeminence of mind, - mind blank and contradictorily exotically full with a readiness ofacceptance,  - that the tomorrow of our hope and growth exists. "...the mostmeaningful discoveries in this coming century are bound to those that celebrate, explore, and exploit the unified quality of technology andlife..." - From Kevin Kelly's Out of Control  -The New Biology of Machines,  SocialSystems, and the Economic World, 1994 - F L        U T T   E RRRR R R RR R Art is about a change in boundaries, areliance on  the transposition of conceptual topographies that thenreconstitutes the once familiar.  Art is what allows us to learn - for it is creativethinking  in action and understanding. oliverh@intergate.bc.ca](diss/one.html)