# This is what Dr. Owens Wiwa, Ken Wiwa's brother 'discreet diplomacy' result in: BY DR. OWENS WIWA (Brother of Ken Saro Wiwa) Steering Commitee Member of the Movement for the Survival of the Ogoni People (MOSOP) PREPARED BY GREENPEACE ON BEHALF OF THE MOVEMENT FOR THE SURVIVAL OF THE OGONI PEOPLE VIDEO DURATION: 23 MINS 18 SECS ------------------------------- FIRST MEETING WITH BRIAN ANDERSON I first met Brian Anderson the chairman and managing director of Shell Nigeria on the Queens birthday party 1995 in Lagos, and he promises to my wife to help, to see that Ken gets adequate medical attention, he says he will see what he can do and we leave at the end of the party and I write of my encounter to Ken send it through my wife who leaves this day to see Ken and through this letter we are very happy to learn that Ken has been taken to the hospital the military hospital for the first time after being in detention for about 11 months. SECOND MEETING WITH BRIAN ANDERSON Well I asked him if he would use his influence to stop the trial announced so that Ken can get can get out of the illegal detention and so that negotiation can start between Shell and the Ogoni people. And he says that's difficult, but not impossible but that the international campaign is hurting Shell and the Nigerian government and if we can stop the campaign that he might be able to do something. So I tell him that I don't have the power to do that, but however I will pass the information to Ken,  and he also at that time said I should try and get into the press - to get a press release and get him a copy, you know mentioning the fact that there is no environmental devastation in Ogoniland and I just say how can I do that, you mean I tell the world that what we've been saying ever since 1990 is a lie, there is no way I will do that. And that happened at our second meeting. THIRD MEETING WITH BRIAN ANDERSON I wrote to Ken and Ken replied back with a letter to Brian Anderson where he gives him two scenarios. The first one - Ken gets killed and becomes a martyr or they [Shell] did the right thing, use their influence with the Nigerian government and get him out of their illegal detention and stop the charade of the tribunal. And when that happens the lobby with the writers will stop, the lobby by the human rights groups will stop and that remains the environmental campaigners and when the environmental lobby sees that he is now discussing with Shell they will lower or stop their campaign. Mr Brian Anderson tells me that he will no longer be available for further discussion as he'll be travelling frequently but that I should continue the discussion with Mr Achebe.  Mr Achebe stresses the importance of continuous dialogue and after a week I phone Achebe and I'm told he's in Germany I phone again a second time and I'm told he's in Abucja and I phone again and I'm told he's in Port Harcourt holding meetings with other Ogoni people and I phone another time and he's not in the office and all this time I'm leaving my number and my messages and I don't get any reply so I now switch back to phone Anderson both in his office and in his house.  Now I phoned the first time in his house and they tell me he's at a cocktail party I phone another time and he's having lunch and I ask whether I can phone after lunch I don't get any answer, but I still phone and still he's not available and I phone another time and I hear he's not around you know and then I sort if get the message and I write back to Ken that it appears that I'm being avoided and Ken writes back - that I shouldn't bother as it appears a decision has been made. DEVASTATION OF OGONILAND Ogoni environment is devastated. I got involved in Ogoniland after coming back to Ogoni after my University medical school and then the first thing that struck me is that the trees around my father's house the oranges and the guavas are no longer there the ones there are not producing any fruit and they sort of shrunken. Then I go to the hospital and the spectrum of diseases I see there is quite different from the ones I was taught at school or the ones I saw in other places I'd worked in Nigeria. A lot of respiratory diseases - high incidence of asthma, cancer, bronchitis and I'm quite surprised and also some bizarre skin diseases and a high level of miscarriages which is quite different from other areas in Nigeria that are not producing oil. And the land Ogoni is a small place  about 404 square miles 12 miles by 32 and large expanse of land that nothing grows on because of the oil spillages that have happened because of oil blow outs gas flares all over Ogoniland. You don't know when it is night it's always glowing. With the noise from the flow stations - it's very deafening and the people speak rather they shout the way of talking because they have to get across to the other person. And the pipe line gas and oil pipelines cris- crossing the whole place on the surface of the ground passing in front of houses at the back of houses on farm land unprotected. SHELL CLAIM SABOTAGE BY OGONI Shell claims that the environmental devastation in Ogoniland is due to sabotage of the installations by Ogoni people, as far as I know no Ogoni person no MOSOP activist has ever been convicted of sabotage of oil installations. The Ogoni people would be the last people on earth to go near the Shell installations because they know that if anything goes wrong on the pipelines or on the installations it is their land which they hold precious that will be spoiled - that will be devastated it is their streams from which they fish and drink water that will be polluted because their is no piped on water in Ogoniland it's only the water from the streams so no Ogoni person will go near any Shell installation for sabotage because that would lead to spillage and we understand spillages and devastated land more than any people in this world. EVIDENCE THAT SHELL ARE INVOLVED WITH MILITARY I drive down to the village of Korokor-tai when I get there I meet another young man on the ground in a pool of blood at the feet of his mother and I'm told that he was shot by Major [Okuntino??] who had come there in the Shell bus accompanied by Shell executives and they had come to the village, said they were coming to look for Shell trucks. In my clinic in Bori Ogoniland I see the police constable coming to my clinic to tell me that all Ogoni people in the police in Ogoni land have been transferred out and I'm scared and he shows me the posting order transferring them and immediately I get to my car because that's frightening and go to visit my brother in hospital and I tell him what I've just heard and give him the police posting order and he immediately writes on it telling the world about what is happening and he's afraid that the first episode of genocide is being planned against the people, the Ogoni people. I see foreign journalists in Bori and I ask what's happening they said they heard that there's shooting a journalist from the Guardian of London and one from the Independent.  And I take them to the village Kaa where most of my patients come from and we arrive there and it's like a small atomic bomb has been placed on the village I mean dropped on the village, everything the market is completely destroyed, the school the houses even the trees are on the ground and it is very very frightening and we do know this time there were police, I mean a military presence in Ogoniland. They were stationed not too far from my clinic so I go back to the army and ask them what has happened, and we go back there and they see the place and one of the officials says that he hasn't seen this sort of thing even while he was serving in Liberia that no destruction has ever been to this level and in that particular incident 35 people are killed and it continues like that another 7 Ogoni villages are all destroyed and a total of about one thousand people are killed in these raids by people using sophisticated weapons on unarmed villages and my patients tell me that the soldiers arrived across Andoni river with Shell boats  and while all this is going on we notice the presence of Shell helicopters hovering around and we're actually very very worried. DETENTION OF OWENS WIWA On the 26th December 1993 on Boxing day I'm in my house with my wife who's pregnant and her sister as well come to spend Christmas with us and a captain in the Nigerian army Captain Tunde Odina comes in and has a beer in my house and eats the food my wife has prepared and at the end of it he tells me to take a holiday, to leave Ogoniland go to Lagos or somewhere. At about 5 O'clock another Major comes in he calls himself Major Akintola of the Army Intelligence Unit at the Brigade in Bori camp and he tells me that the governor of the state Lieutenant Colonel Komo wants to see me and Barika Idamkue because at this time Barika Idamkue is the secretary of the Ogoni Relief and Rehabilitation Committee and I'm the coordinator so I mean we go there happily thinking that the Governor wants to give some relief to the people so at the end of the conversation I tell him that I was told by a captain, Captain Tunde Odina that I was to be arrested.  So the Governor tells me that is not true that is just one of the rumours that we hear and keep telling people and there's nothing like that so I go back to my house have dinner with my family and go to bed. At about 2am the same captain who had come to my house you know to eat and drink comes in shouting, breaking my door and asks where is Dr Wiwa, I say well I'm here and then the other soldiers climb the fence and generally make noise and then I ask what is the matter and he tells me you are, by the order of the Federal Republic of Nigeria you are under arrest.  So I go back to my room change into my clothes and go into the 504 military vehicle and the other soldiers enter squeeze me in and they take me straight to the country home of Mr Ledum Mitee the Deputy president of MOSOP and repeat the same sort of thing they did in my house and bring the guy into the car and then the soldiers are coming inside too with their guns reeking of alcohol and marijuana and generally threatening us you know, and took us straight to the Air force base in Port Harcourt and later to the house of the government reservation division in Port Harcourt. And we stayed there until the 4th of January at about 5 O'clock or so Major Okuntimo comes in to meet us and to discuss.  We ask him why we are detained he doesn't tell us anything, all he says is he's following his orders and then curiously asks us that since MOSOP is big it's powerful that we should join forces with him you know to see that one Mr Lawson-Jack senior executive of Shell in Port Harcourt is removed and we tell him that we don't do things like that.  We talk about ideas and how to change corporate behaviour in terms of the environmental devastation of Ogoniland we are not in for removing individuals and all that and he insist and so we ask him why, why do you want the man off? and then he explains that the man has been undercutting him in his payments that he was also receiving from Shell. And after our discussion he tells us that we are released and on getting out I meet my mother-in-law and I ask about my wife and she answers that they are fine, I say what do you mean they are fine?  I only have one wife, so she says they are fine that you have a child I said a child ?, she said yes, a son, I said yes how do I know it's a son I said I dreamt you know but then my wife is not due but I rushed down to the hospital that she's supposed to have delivered and I go in there and see her very happy and beside her there's, there's a young kid you know all red and cries when he sees me and I go and pick up my son and I feel very happy and I decide to forget and forgive my detention because that has brought me a son and asked my wife how everything happens and she tells me that after they are taking me away after some hours when daylight was coming she decides to come and look for me.  And at this time there are many roadblocks manned by the army in Ogoniland and she is stopped in one of the roadblocks and she comes out, she is asked to come out of the car, she comes out and they ask her who she is and she tells the person that she's my wife and they say Oh that trouble maker so they ask her to identify herself further , she says she's a housewife and housewives don't carry ID cards. So they search her and they decide to search her person and she doesn't like that and the army man tell her to go into the stream, the stream is polluted covered with oil, my wife doesn't know how to swim.  She protests, she gets the gun, they put up the gun pushing her from the back and she is pushed into the pond, into the stream but because of her hydrophobia she comes out and then the man aims the nozzle of the gun at her pregnant abdomen and then contractions start to come on and that process leads her to the hospital and my baby comes out born on January 4th Ogoni day and that's how I get my child. Dr Owens Wiwa