# The flames of Shell are flames of Hell, We bask below their light, Nought for us to serve the blight, Of cursed neglect and cursed Shell.'33 \_ Ogoni song To somebody recently acquainted with the subject, the Ogoni's situation may seem more about human rights than the environment. After all, Nigeria has a history of puppet dictators, military rule and has denied its people democratic elections and minority rights. The Ogoni issue however is more reaching and symbolic because it highlights the possible outcome for communities who object to the decimation of their natural resources. The Niger Delta and Nigerian coastal wetlands have been described as one of the most fragile ecosystems in the world and include rainforest and mangrove habitats5. Because of the intense industrial activity, the area has been labelled the most endangered delta in the world. Demand for land is high with over six million people living in the region7 and only 30% of the delta unaffected by flooding. Certain areas of the delta are densely populated, such as the region of Ogoni, which averages 1,250 people per kilometre, compared to the Nigerian average of 300 per kilometre. The Ogoni, a distinct ethnic group within the Federal Republic of Nigeria, have a long history of preserving their surrounding environment which they regard as sacred. Rivers and streams provide water for bathing, drinking and fish for food, so are bound up intricately with the life of the community. The Ogoni, whose population is approximately 500,000, occupy an area of 404 square miles8. The heavy competition between the oil companies and the Ogoni for what is, by-right, Ogoni land has resulted in extreme tension in the area and the severe punishment of the community. Shell has been operating in the Niger Delta since 1958. In its thirty-six years of operations, rather than setting standards and promoting a positive relationship with local people, as well as sound environmental and social policies, the company seemingly has done little. The importance of Nigeria's oil to Shell cannot be underestimated, accounting for almost 14% of the company's production which equates to the greatest production outside the USA9. Neither can the importance of oil sales to the Nigerian government be underestimated, accounting for around 80% of government revenue10. Therefore, both Shell and the Nigerian government have an interest in maintaining the status quo and continuing with business as usual. For those in power, the Ogoni's campaign to protect their environment cannot gain momentum or international acclaim because it raises uncomfortable questions about the rights of communities to control their local environment and the rights of multinational oil companies. So with brute force and systematic violence, the Ogoni are being silenced. -------------------------------------------------------------------------- The environmental and social costs of living next door to Shell  (GREENPEACE DOCUMENT) '... SPDC [Shell Petroleum Development Company] always tries to minimise the impact operations on the environment but also to ensure that local communities gain real benefits from having a Shell company as a neighbour.' \_ Richard Tookey, former Head of Public Affairs,SPDC While this report focuses on the record of Shell in the Niger Delta, it serves as an example of the way in which oil companies operate in different parts of the world. While oil companies' operations in developed regions are usually accompanied by environmental impact assessments,social and environmental policies \_ and not to mention a great deal of effort to appease the justifiedconcerns of local communities \_ these practices are not exported to lesser developed regions where little or no media attention is paid and where accountability is unheard of. In what is the largest exploration and production venture in Nigeria, Shell's subsidiary, Shell Petroleum Development Company (SPDC), operates a joint venture agreement with the Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation (NNPC). Shell's Nigerian operations have a capacity of one million barrels a day and its importance to Shell as a source of revenue cannot be over-emphasized. But Shell's operations in Nigeria have been dogged by local unrest and criticism from communities within the oil-producing areas and drawn increasing condemnation from abroad. Since the beginning of Shell's operations in the Niger Delta, the company has wreaked havoc on neighbouring communities and their environment. Many of its operations and materials are outdated, in poor condition and would be illegal in other parts of the world. The problems described here in Ogoni are indicative of the problems experienced by other communities along the Delta. Gas Flaring Many of Shell's gas flares are situated very close to villages, sometimes within a hundred metres of Ogoni homes. The company has been flaring at some sites for 24 hours a day for more than 30 years. '... Flares are usually located far from human habitation and protected by earth bunds. When communities have expanded in the direction of production facilities, SPDC has taken appropriate action, including relocation of flares. There is no evidence that flares affect crops.' Local reports present evidence which proves otherwise: '... Apart from physical destruction to plants around the flaring areas, thick soots are deposited on building roofs of neighbouring villages. Whenever it rains, the soots are washed off and the black-ink like water running down the roofs is believed to contain chemicals which adversely affect the fertility of the soil.' Ken Saro-Wiwa, author and spokesperson for the Movement for the Survival of Ogoni People (MOSOP), argues: 'The most notorious action of both companies [Shell and Chevron] has been the flaring of gas, sometimes in the middle of villages, as in Dere, (Bomu oilfield) or very close to human habitation as in the Yorla and Korokoro oilfields in Ogoni. This action has destroyed wildlife, and plant life, poisoned the atmosphere and therefore the inhabitants in the surrounding areas and made the residents half-deaf and prone to respiratory diseases. Whenever it rains in Ogoni, all we have is acid rain which further poisons water courses, streams, creeks and agricultural land.' Concerning the close proximity of its gas flares, Shell argues that this is a result of communities expanding into the vicinity of oil operations. The company maintains that once this happens, gas flares are relocated away from populous areas27. However, the Ogoni maintain that Shell has never relocated a gas flare28. Pipelines Shell's high-pressure pipelines pass above ground through villages and criss- cross over land that was once used for agricultural purposes, rendering it economically useless. Many pipelines also pass within metres of Ogoni homes. Responding to criticism of Shell's pipelines, Richard Tookey stated in 1992: '... You suggest that pipelines should be buried as a means of preventing pollution. Much of the area in which SPDC is operating is swamp, so burying pipelines could, in fact, exacerbate the risk of fractures and spillages. From time to time the positioning of pipelines is reviewed, especially when it is known that communities have expanded onto land neighbouring a pipeline, and if considered a hazard then the pipelines are re-routed.' However, the Ogoni claim that their land is neither swampy, nor has a pipe ever reportedly been re-routed30. No consultation takes place at all: before or during pipe-laying. But to emphasize further the fact that Shell does not apply the same standards worldwide, consider one of it's operations in the UK. For Shell's pipeline from Stanlow in Cheshire to Mossmoran in Scotland, 17 different environmental surveys were commissioned before a single turf was cut. The company explains: 'A painstakingly detailed Environmental Impact Assessment covered every metre of the route, and each hedge, wall and fence was catalogued and ultimately replaced or rebuilt exactly as it had been before Shell arrived. Elaborate measures were taken to avoid lasting disfiguration and the route was diverted in several places to accommodate environmental concerns ...' This is a far cry from Shell's practices in Nigeria. The Ogoni have never seen, let alone been consulted over, an environmental impact assessment. Greenpeace and other organizations have approached Shell to release environmental impact studies it claims to have conducted since 1982 so that a full and open analysis can be made of the extent of environmental and social damage. No impact studies have been freely circulated. Oil Spills The communities in the Niger Delta have been said to be 'groaning under the perennial destructionof their property and environment by oil spillages'. As early as 1983, the Inspectorate Division of the Nigerian Petroleum Corporation drew attentionto the impact of oil on the Nigerian environment: 'We witnessed the slow poisoning of the waters of this country, and the destruction of vegetation,and agricultural land by oil spills which occur during petroleum operations. But since the inception of the oil industry in Nigeria more than twenty-five years ago, there has been no concerned and effective effort on the part of the Government, let alone the oil operators to control the environmental problems associated with the industry.' In one of the most recent spills in Ogoni, oil leaked from a Shell flowline for 40 days between July and August 199336 without repair, further contaminating Ogoni farmland. Shell argued that its engineers were unable to get into the area to repair the pipeline for fear of violence, but this has been vehemently denied by the Ogoni. According to an independent record of Shell's spills from 1982 to 1992, 1,626,000 gallons were spilt from the company's Nigerian operations in 27 separate incidents. Of the total number of spills recorded from Shell \_ a company which operates in more than 100 countries \_ 40% were in Nigeria. Concerning the Ogoni region, Shell has recently argued that in 1992, 60% of its oil spills in Ogoni were caused by sabotage and therefore no reflection of the company's operating standards. This is refuted by Professor Claude Ake of the UN World Commission on Development and Culture: '... nobody can say that most of the pollution in Ogoniland is caused by sabotage. In fact, as far as I know, what the Ogonis have tried to do is to put out the flares, which is something that importantly reduces pollution ... I think that this is the kind of irresponsible propaganda that the oil companies are putting out in order to discredit those who are trying to do something about the environment ...' So far, we only have Shell's word that most of the spills are caused by sabotage since attempts to gain independent access to the area in order to investigate the situation have been unsuccessful. However, it is widely known that most spills occur throughout Nigeria because of malfunction or corrosion of equipment. According to the Nigerian Ministry of Petroleum Resources, there were 2,676 recorded spills between 1976 and 1990, with the largest single cause of spill in general \_ 38% \_ due to equipment malfunction, with sabotage only responsible for 18%. Corrosion of equipment accounted for 21% of spills. Sabotage only accounted for 3% of the total oil spilt in the time period. Similarly, according to the independent ten year spill record, only 4 of the 27 spills recorded from Shell's operations in Nigeria were due to sabotage. Corrosion, equipment failure, pipe ruptures and blowouts were the main cause of spillages. Finally, it is difficult to estimate the exact figure for spillage because many go unreported. This makes the call for a full and open assessment of the region all the more urgent, so that the effect of oil pollution damage and the causes can be measured. Villages in the Delta are impoverished as a result of the depletion of healthy fish and poisoned drinking water. A report submitted by the Rivers Chiefs to the World Conference of Indigenous Peoples on Environment and Development at Rio's Earth Summit in June 1992, stated: 'Thus apart from air pollution from the oil industry's emissions and flares day and night,producing poisonous gases that are silently and systematically wiping out vulnerable airborne biota and otherwise endangering the life of plants, game and man himself, we have widespread water pollution and soil/land pollution that respectively result in the death of most aquatic eggs and juvenile stages of life of fin-fish and shell-fish and sensible animals (like oysters) on the one hand, whilst, on the other hand agricultural land contaminated with oil spills become dangerous for farming, even where they continue to produce any significant yields. 'Apart from the basic fact that contaminated soils are rendered relatively but seriously infertile and polluted, sometimes for at least 30 years, the farmers and fishermen who have thus been dislocated then observe with great anger the extremely wide gulf between the lifestyles and incomes of oil-industry workers and themselves rendered economically impotent by the same oil industry:confrontations and anger in the oil producing areas occasionally explode into calamities.'