## [immersions immersions The Ecology of Communications is a program of immersion into the subtleties of links
between various dimensions of electronic cultural production and consumption, between
various mediums, artists, aesthetics, practices, politics and sites. It is to be a speaking about these links as
interpretations and interpenetrations - with the intent of understanding the cultural
production and distribution ramifications of our new capabilities. It bears repeating: "Tools are artefacts, but they are not in essence objects.  Since they qualitatively
increase a species possibility of organising and controlling the matter-energy in their
ecosystem, their primary characteristic is that of information.  They are forms that
inform; they are informed because they remember the past and make possible new types of
projections into the future." Anthony Wilden, "System and Structure" To suppose that an ecology of communications exists presupposes that there is an evolution to
communications.   That evolution is substantially one of co-evolution.  Human culture  is a product of
evolutionary strategies.  These primary tools of the human - art making, language, writing, 
- are
the essential mnemonic mechanisms of human biocultural evolution and ecology.  They are
not only the bees that pollinate the gardens of our minds, but have had and will
continue to have a symbiotic relationship to the potential uses of our minds ways of
understanding. Ecology is not a homeostatic operation but the  complex dynamic of
evolutionary and syncretic potentialities. 0 fluid
skin 1](0_816.htm)