# A prescient letter from Ken Saro-Wiwa, published in the Mail&amp;Guardian in May1995 - "A YEAR has gone by since I was rudely roused from mybed and clamped into detention. Sixty-five days in chains, weeks of starvation, months of mental torture and, recently, the rides in a steaming,airless Black Maria to appear before a kangaroo court, dubbed a specialmilitary tribunal, where the proceedings leave  no doubt that the judgment hasbeen written in advance. And a sentence of death against which there is noappeal is a certainty. Fearful odds? Hardly. The men who ordain andsupervise this show of shame, this tragic charade, are frightened by theword, the power of ideas, the power of the pen; by the demands of social justiceand the rights of man. Nor do they have a sense of history. They are so scaredof the power of the word, that they do not read. And that is their funeral. When, after years of writing, I decided to take the word to thestreets to mobilise the Ogoni people, and empower them to protest against thedevastation of their environment by Shell, and their denigration anddehumanisation by Nigeria's military dictators, I had no doubt where it couldend. This knowledge has given me strength, courage and cheer - and psychologicaladvantage over my tormentors. Only yesterday, the Spirit of Ogonimagicked into my cell a lovely poem by Jack Mapanje, the veteran of KamuzuBanda's jails: four years without charge. I had met Jack in Potsdam andwondered how he had survived it all. Writing from Leeds University,his poem urged me to wear the armour of humour. The note at the end was alsosigned by Chengerai Hove, the award-winning Zimbabwean novelist. How wonderfulto  know how many fine men, the best brains, care for one's distress. Ultimately the fault lies at the door of the British government. It is theBritish government which supplies arms and credit to the military dictators ofNigeria, knowing full well that all such arms will only be used againstinnocent, unarmed citizens. It is the British government which makesnoises about democracy in Nigeria and Africa but supports military dictators tothe hilt. It is the British government which supports the rape and devastationof the environment by a valued, tax-paying, labour-employing organisationlike Shell. I lay my travails, the destruction of the Ogoni and other peoples in the Niger delta, at the door of the British government. Ultimately, the decision is for the British people, the electorate, to stop thisgrand deceit, this double standard, which has lengthened the Africannightmare and denigrates humanity. Whether I live or die isimmaterial. It is enough to know that there are people who commit time,money and energy to fight this one evil among so many others predominatingworldwide. If they do not succeed today, they will succeed tomorrow. We mustkeep on striving to make the world a better place for all of mankind - eachone contributing his bit, in his or her own way. Isalute you all. -Ken Saro-Wiwa, Military Hospital, Port Harcourt, Nigeria." "Whether I live or die is immaterial. We must keep on striving to make the worlda better place for all of mankind -- each one contributin his bit, in his or herown way."