## [transverse worlds call for submissions TransVerse wOr[l]ds volume2ofdigitaleArTh presents the work of six canadian artists exploring the transverse; is based on notions of cultural, personal, theoretical, political, and physicaltransVersAll; artists are lena olin, alex mackenzie, claude lamarche-2/npc, katherine lee, tom berryhill, greg garvey [  &lt; L &lt; trans- prefix across, beyond, through; on the other side of; throughand through, changing completely, surpassing; transcending; across,transverse ] [  Fusion of OE fers and OF vers, both &lt; L versus a turning, verse &lt; vertereto turn ] transverse worlds converge and are based in the complexities and gracesof transverse anarchies.  transverse worlds meet in web-based,architecturally-based,  body-based,  data-based and de-basedconstructions of language and self.  this referral to the transverse islinked to notions of  the diverse, inverse, perverse &amp; converse.transverse worlds is informed by interpretations and interpenetrations:intersection, crossbreeding,  including all verse. digital eARTh disputes the singular detached evaluation by re-presentingproduction as an evolutionary and multiple voiced practice.   Transverseworlds subverts the singular detached viewpoint with the intrusion andjuxtaposition of alternate perspectives voiced from within the links, text,image, and essays. transversal  includes the subjective alongside the theoretical.transversal invites discourse which frames artists work in the contextof their own histories and other parallel histories.  Ficto-criticism is thenotion of combining the personal with the objective.  web based art thattransverses is a program of immersion into the subtleties of links betweenvarious dimensions of electronic cultural production and consumption,between various mediums, artists, aesthetics, practices,  politics andsites. contact: thecla@cs.sfu.ca or: oliverh@intergate.bc.ca](mailto:thecla@cs.sfu.ca)

<!-- 🖼️❌ Image not available. Please use `PdfPipelineOptions(generate_picture_images=True)` -->

<!-- 🖼️❌ Image not available. Please use `PdfPipelineOptions(generate_picture_images=True)` -->