## [transverse worlds submission guidelines ..... submitting dead lnes intention to participate:     ongoing;  preliminary submissions:      ongoing;  final project submission:      january 1st 1997;  project completion:           may 1st 1997;  web launch:                   veaf '97  may 15th - 19th 1997;                              vancouver electronic arts festival requrd sbmissn minimally a 1 to 2 page written synopsis and treatment is required that describes the work that you propose to build.  this can be submitted as a text file or an html file.   although it is not required, please feelfree to include a limited number of images. it would be useful if you could include the URL for any current web work as well.  please also include a 50 word biography  which describes your artistic practice. submssn dayts although the submission deadline is january 1st, 1997, we wouldlike you to send us an intention to participate if you are interestedin submitting work.   we welcome submission entries and ideasprior to the deadline. sbmssion critria a peer jury including the curators, thecla schiphorst andoliver hockenhull will review the submissions and select the workto be exhibited.  this call is open globally to all artists who wishto participate.  we will select 9 works in all to participate in transverse worlds. hnoraria the canada council of the Arts has enabled us to providehonoraria of $400 cdn to be awarded to four selected canadianartists. In addition we will invite up to 5 outstanding works selected from all the applications. projct completn &amp; ntwrk spport all works selected will be provided with server space andaccess and technical network support. no financial resources (other than the already stated honorariums)  are available through transverse worlds at this time. selected artists must have their own local technical support forconstructing their work, and  provide transverse worlds with a completed, web-ready, up-loadable piece by may 1st 1997. work that has been selected but has not been completed by may 1, 1997 will not be included in the opening launch which willoccur may 15th to 18th during veaf '97, the third annualvancouver electronic arts festival. .... calling Contact: thecla@cs.sfu.ca or oliverh@intergate.bc.ca](tw_call.htm)

<!-- 🖼️❌ Image not available. Please use `PdfPipelineOptions(generate_picture_images=True)` -->

<!-- 🖼️❌ Image not available. Please use `PdfPipelineOptions(generate_picture_images=True)` -->