## Simulations Jean Baudrillard

Translated by Paul Foss, Paul Patton and Philip Beitchman

Semiotext [e]

01983 Semiotext[e] and Jean Baudrillad

Printed in the United States of America

1 0 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2

## Contents

.  .  . .  .  .

.  .  .  .  .

.  .

.  .  .  . .  .

.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .

.  .  .

.I

.  . .  .

.  .  . .  .

.  .  .

## The Precession o f Simulacra

The simulacrum  is never that which conceals the truth-it is the truth  which  conceals  that there is none.

The simulacrum is true.

Ecclesiastes

If we were  able  to  take  as  the  finest allegory o f simulation the Borges tale where the cartographers o f   the Empire draw up a map  so  detailed that  it  ends  up  exactly covering the territory (but where thedecline of   the Empire sees this map become frayed and finally ruined, a few shreds still discernible in the desertsthe metaphysical beauty  of this  ruined  abstraction,  bearing witness to  an Imperial pride and rotting like a carcass,  returning  to the substance of  the soil, rather as an aging double ends up  being confused  with  the  real  thing)-then this fable has come full circle for us, and now has nothing but  the discrete charm o f secondorder simulacra. 1

## Jean Baudrillard

Abstraction  today  is  no longer that of the  map, the  double, the  mirror  or  the concept.  Simulation  is  no longer  that  of  a territory,  a referential being or a substance. I t   is  the  generation  by models  of a  real without origin  or  reality:  a  hyperreal.  The territory  no longer  precedes  the map,  nor survives it.  Henceforth,  it  is  the  map  that precedes  the  territory -PRECESSION O F SIMULACRA-it is the  map t  hat engenders the territory and if  we were to revive the fable today, it would be the  territory whose shreds are slowly  rotting across the map.  It is the real, and not the map, whose vestiges subsist here and there, in the deserts which are no longer those of  the Empire, but our own. The deserf of the real itself.

In fact, even  inverted, the  fable  is useless.  Perhaps  only  the  allegory  o f the Empire  remains.  For  it  is  with  the  same Imperialism that present-day simulators try to make  the real,  all  the real, coincide with their simulation models. But it is no longer a question of either maps or territory. Something  has  disappeared:  the sovereign difference between them that was  the abstraction's  charm. For  it is the difference

-or which forms the poetry of  the map and the charm  of the  territory,  the  magic  of the concept  and  the  charm  of the  real.  This representational imaginary, which both culminates in and is engulfed by the cartographer's mad project of an ideal coextensivity  between the  map  and  the territory, disappears with simulation whose operation is nuclear and genetic, and no  longer  specular  and discursive.  With  it goes all o f   metaphysics. No more mirror of being  and  appearances,  o f the real  and  its concept. No more imaginary  coextensivity: rather, genetic miniaturisation is the dimension of  simulation. The real is produced from miniaturised  units,  from matrices,  memory banks and command models-and with these it can be reproduced an indefinite number of times. It no longer has to  be rational, since it is  no longer measured against some ideal negative  instance.  It is  nothing  more than operational.  In  fact,  since  it  is  no  longer enveloped  by  an  imaginary,  it  is  no longer real at all. It is a hyperreal, the product o f   an irradiating synthesis o f   combinatory models in a hyperspace without atmosphere.

In this passage t o a space whose

## Jean Baudrillard

curvature is no longer that o f   the  real, nor of truth, the age  of  simulation thus  begins with a  liquidation  o f   all  referentials-worse: by their  artificial  resurrection  in  systems  of signs, a more ductile material than meaning, in that  it lends  itself to  all  systems  of equivalence,  all  binary  oppositions  and  all combinatory algebra. It is no  longer a question of  imitation,  nor of  reduplication, nor even of  parody. I t   is rather a question o f substituting  signs  o f the  real  for  the  real itself, that is, an  operation todeter every real process by its operational double, a metastable,  programmatic,  perfect descriptive machine which provides all the signs o f   the real and short-circuits  all its vicissitudes.  Never again will the real have to  be produced-this is the vital function of the model in a system of death, or rather  of anticipated  resurrection  which  no longer  leaves  any chance even  in  the  event  o f death. A hyperreal henceforth  sheltered  from  the  imaginary, and  from any distinction  between  the real and the imaginary, leaving room only for the orbital recurrence of models and the simulated generation of  difference.

## The Divine Irreference of Images

To dissimulate is  to feign  not  to have what one has. To simulate is to  feign t o   have what one hasn't. One  implies a presence, the other an  absence.  But  the matter  is  more complicated,  since to simulate is not simply t o   feign: 'Someone who  feigns an illness can simply go to bed  and make believe he is ill. Some who simulates an illness produces in himself some  of the  symptoms.'  (Littre) Thus,  feigning or dissimulating  leaves  the reality principle  intact: the  difference  is always  clear,  it  is  only  masked;  whereas simulation threatens the  difference  between true' and 'false', between 'real'  and 'imaginary'. Since the simulator produces. 'true' symptoms, is he ill or not? He cannot be treated objectively either as ill, or as notill.  Psychology  and  medicine  stop  at  this point, before  a  thereafter  undiscoverable truth of   the illness. For if  any symptom can be'produced', and can no longer be accepted as a fact o f   nature, then every illness may be considered as simulatable and simulated,  and medicine  loses  its  meaning  since  it  only knows how to treat 'true' illnesses by their It

objective causes. Psychosomatics evolves in a dubious  way  on  the  edge  of the  illness principle. As for psychoanalysis,  it transfers the symptom  from  the  organic  to  the unconscious  order: once again, the latter is held t o   be true, more true than the  formerbut why should simulation stop  at the  portals of the unconscious?  Why couldn't the 'work' of  the unconscious be 'produced' in the  same  way  as  any  other  symptom  in classical medicine? Dreams already are.

The alienist, of  course, claims that 'for each form of the mental alienation there is a particular  order in  the succession o f   symptoms, of  which the simulator is unaware and in the  absence  of which the  alienist is unlikely  to be  deceived.'  This (which dates from 1865) in  order  to save at all cost  the truth  principle,  and  to escape  the  spectre raised  by  simulation-namely that  truth, reference and objective  causes have ceased to exist. What can medicine do with something which  floats  on  either  side  o f illness,  on either side of  health, or with the reduplication o f   illness in a discourse that is no longer true or false?  What  can  psychoanalysis  do with the reduplication of thediscourseof the

unconscious in a discourse of simulation that can  never  be  unmasked,  since it  isn't  false either? 2

What can the army do with simulators? Traditionally,  following a direct principle of iden  ti  fica  tion, it unmasks and punishes them.  Today,  it  can  reform  an  excellent simulator as though he were equivalent to  a 'real'  homosexual, heart-case or  lunatic. Even  military  psychology  retreats from the Cartesian clarities and hesitates to  draw the distinction between true and false, between the 'produced' symptom and the authentic symptom. 'If  he acts crazy so well,  then he must be mad.'Nor is it mistaken: in thesense that all lunatics are simulators, and this lack of   distinction is  the worst  form o f   subversion. Against  it classical reason armed itself with  all  its  categories.  But  it  is  this  today which again outflanks them, submerging the truth principle.

Outside  of medicine and  the  army, favored  terrains  of simulation,  the  affair goes back to religion and the simulacrum of divinity:  'I  forbad  any  simulacrum  in  the temples  because  the divinity  that breathes life into  nature  cannot  be  represented.'

## Jean  Baudrillard

Indeed  it  can.  But  what  becomes  of the divinity when it reveals itself in icons, when it is  multiplied  in simulacra? D o e s it remain the supreme authority, simply incarnated in images as a visible theology? O r is it volatilized into  simulacra which alone  deploy their  pomp  and  power  of  fascination-the visible  machinery of  icons being substituted for the pure  and intelligibleIdea o f   God?  This is precisely what was feared by the Iconoclasts,  whose  millenial  quarrel is  still with us today. 3 Their  rage  to  destroy images  rose  precisely  because  they  sensed this  omnipotence  of  simulacra,  this facility they have of effacing God from the consciousness of  men, and the overwhelming,  destructive  truth which  they  suggest: that ultimately there has never been any God, that only the simulacrum exists, indeed that God  himself  has  only  ever  been  his  own simulacrum.  Had  they been  able to believe that  images  only  occulted or masked  the Platonic Idea of  God, there would have been no reason to destroy them. One  can live with the  idea of a  distorted truth.  But  their metaphysical despair came from the  idea that the images concealed nothing at all, and that

in  fact they  were  not  images,  such  as  the original  model would  have made them, but actually perfect simulacra  forever  radiant with their own fascination. But this death of the divine referential has to be exorcised at all cost.

It can be seen that the iconoclasts, who are often accused of  despising and denying images, were in fact the ones who accorded them their actual worth, unlike  the iconolaters, who  saw  in  them  only  reflections  and were content to  venerate God at one  remuve. But the converse  can also be  said,  namely  that  the iconolaters were the most modern and adventurous minds, since underneath the idea of  the apparition  o f   God  in the  mirror of images, they already enacted his death and his disappearance in the epiphany  o f   his representations  (which  they  perhaps knew no longer represented anything,  and  that they  were purely a game, but that this was precisely the greatest game--)cnowing also that it is dangerous to  unmask images, since they dissimulate  the fact that there  is nothing behind them).

This was  the  approach  of  the Jesuits, who  based their politics on  the  virtual disappearance of God and on the worldly and spectacular  manipulation  o f consciencesthe evanescence  of  God in the epiphany of power-the end of  transcendence, which no longer serves as alibi for a strategy completely free  of influences and  signs. Behind th6 baroque of images hides the grey eminence of  politics.

Thus perhaps at stake has always been the murderous capacity of images, muderers of  the real,  murderers o f   their own model as the Byzantine icons could murder the divine identity. To  this murderous  capacity is opposed the dialectical capacity of representations as a visible and intelligible mediation of the Real.  All  of  Western  faith and good faith was engaged in this wager on representation: that a sign could refer to the depth of  meaning,  that a sign could exchange for meaning and that something  could guarantee  this  exchangeGod,  o f course. But  what  if  God  himself  can  be  simulated, that  is  to say,  reduced  to the signs  which attest his existence? Then the whole system becomes weightless, it is no longer anything

but a gigantic simulacrum-not unreal, but a simulacrum,  never  again  exchanging  for what is  real,  but exchanging in itself, in an uninterrupted  circuit  without  reference or circumference.

So it is with simulation, insofar as it is opposed to representation. The latter starts from the principle that the sign and the real are equivalent  (even if  this  equivalence  is utopian,  it  is  a  fundamental  axiom).  Conversely,  simulation starts from the utopia of this  principle o f   equivalence, f r o m the radical negation  of the  sign US oaIue, from  the  sign as reversion and death sentence of every reference. Whereas  representation  tries  to absorb simulation by  interpreting it as false representation, simulation envelops the whole  edifice o f representation  as  itself  a simulacrum.

This would be the successive phases of the image:

-it is  the reflection  of  a basic reality

-it masks and perverts a basic reality

-it masks the absence of  a basic reality

-it bears  no  relation  to  any  reality whatever. it is  its own pure simulacrum.

In  the  first  case,  the  image  is  a good

## lean Baudrillard

appearance-the representation  is  of the order of  sacrament. In the second, it is an evil appearance-of the order of  malefice. In the third,  it plays uf being an appearance-it is of the order of  sorcery.  In the fourth, it is no longer in the  order  of appearance at  all, but of simulation.

The  transition  from  signs  which  dissimulate something to signs which dissimulate that there is nothing, marks the decisive turning point. The first implies a theology of truth  and  secrecy  (to which  the notion  of ideology still belongs). The second inaugurates an age of  simulacra  and stimulation,  in which there is no  longer any  God  to recognise his own, nor any last judgement to separate  true  from  false,  the real  from its artificial  resurrection, since  everything  is already dead and risen in advance.

When the real is no longer what it used t o   be,  nostalgia  assumes  its  full  meaning. There is  a  proliferation  of  myths of  origin and signs of reality;  o f   second-hand  truth, objectivity  and  authenticity. There  is  an escalation o f   the  true, of the  lived experience; a  resurrection  o f   the figurative where the object and substance have disappeared. And

there  is  a  panic-stricken  production  of  the real and the referential, above and parallel to the panic of  material production: this is how simulation appears in the phase that concerns us-a strategy of  the real, neo-real and  hypperral  whose universal  double is a strategy of   deterrence.

## R a rn es  es,  or  Rose-  C  o lo u red  Res u rrec f  i o   n

Ethnology almost met  a paradoxical death that  day in  1971 when the Phillipino government decided to return the few  dozen Tasaday discovered deep  in the  jungle, where they had lived for eight centuries undisturbed by the rest o f   mankind, to  their primitive state, out of  reach o f   colonists,  tourists and ethnologists. This was at the initiative of the anthropologists  themselves,  who  saw  the natives decompose immediately on contact, like a mummy in the open air.

For ethnology to live, its object must die. But  the latter  revenges  itself  by  dying for having been "discovered", and defies by its death the science that wants to take hold of it.

Doesn't every science live on  this

## Jean Baudrillard

paradoxical  slope  to which  it  is doomed by the  evanescence  of its  object  in  the  very process  of its  apprehension, and  by  the pitiless reversal this dead object exerts on it? Like  Orpheus  it  always  turns  around  too soon, and its object, like Eurydice, falls back into Hades.

It was against this hades of  paradox that the  ethnologists  wanted  to  protect  themselves  by  cordoning  off  the  Tasaday  with virgin  forest. Nobody now will touch it: the vein is closed down, like a mine. Science  loses a  precious  capital,  but  the  object. will  be safe-lost to science, but intact in its 'virginity'.  It  isn't a  question  o f sacrifice (science  never  sacrifices  itself:  it  is  always murderous), but of  the simulated sacrifice of its object in order to save its reality principle. The Tasaday, frozen in their natural element,  provide  a  perfect  alibi, an eternal guarantee. At this point  begins a persistent anti-ethnology  to  which  Jaulin, Castaneda and  Clastres variously  belong. In any case, the logical evolution o f  a science is todistance itself  ever  further  from  its  object  until  it dispenses  with it entirely:  its  autonomy evermore  fantastical  in  reaching  its  pure

form.

The Indian thereby driven back into the ghetto, into the glass coffin of  virgin forest, becomes the simulation model for all conceivable Indians before ethnology. The  latter thus allows itself the luxury of being incarnate beyond itself, in the'brute' reality of  these Indians it has entirely reinventedSavages who are indebted to ethnology for still  being Savages:  what a  turn  o f   events, what  a triumph for this science  which seemed dedicated  to their destruction!

Of  course,  these particular  Savages are posthumous: frozen, cryogenised, sterilised, protected fo death,  they have become referential  simulacra,  and the science itself  a  pure simulation. Same thing at Creusot where, in the form of  an 'open' museum exhibition, they  have  'museumised  on  the  spot,  as historical  witnesses  to their  period,  entire working class quartiers, living metallurgical zones,  a  complete  culture  including  men, women  and  children  and  their  gestures, languages  and  habits-living beings  fossilised  as in a snap shot. The museum, instead of being  curcumscribed  in  a  geometrical location,  is  now everywhere,  like a dimen-

## Jean  Baudrillard

sion of life  itself. Thus ethnology, now freed from  its  object,  will  no  longer  be  circumscribed as an objective science but is applied to all living things and becomes invisible, like an  omnipresent  fourth  dimension,  that o f the simulacrum. We are all Tasaday. or Indians who  have  once  more  become 'what  they used to  be'' ,   or at least that which ethnology has  made them-simulacra Indians  who proclaim at last the universal truth  of ethnology.

We all  become  living  specimens  under the spectral  light  of  ethnology,  or of  antiethnology  which  is  only  the pure form of triumphal ethnology, under the sign of dead differences, and of the resurrection of differences. It is thus extremely naive tolook for ethnology among the Savages or in some Third World-it is  here,  everywhere, in the metropolis,  among  the  whites,  in  a  world completely catalogued and analysed and then artificially r m i d as though  real,  in  a  world  of simulation:  of  the hallucination of  truth, o f blackmail  by  the  real,  of  the  murder  and historical (hysterical) retrospection of  every symbolic form-a murder whose first

victims  were,  noblesse oblige,, the Savages, but  which  for  a  long  time  now  has  been extended to all Western societies.

But  at  the  same  moment  ethnology gives up its final and only lesson, the secret which kills it (and  which the savages understood  much better): the vengeance o f the dead.

The confinement of  the scientific object is the same as that of the  insane  and the  dead. And just as the whole of society is hopelessly contaminated by  that  mirror of  madness it has held out for itself, so science can only die contaminated  by  the  death  of the  object which is its  inverse mirror. It  is science which ostensibly  masters  the object,  but  it  is  the latter which deeply invests the  former, following an unconscious reversion, giving only  dead and circular replies to a dead and circular interrogation.

Nothing  changes  when  society  breaks the  mirror  of  madness  (abolishes asylums, gives speech back to the mad, etc.) nor when science  seems  to  break  the  mirror  of its objectivity (effacing  itself before its object, as Castaneda  does,  etc.)  and  to  bow  down before "differences". Confinement  is  SUC-

## Jean Baudrillard

ceeded  by  an  apparatus  which  assumes  a countless  and  endlessly  diffractable,  multipliable  form. As fast  as  ethnology  in  its classical  institution  collapses,  it  survives  in an  anti-ethnology whose  task  is  to  reinject fictional difference  and  Savagery  everywhere, in order to conceal the fact that it is this  world,  our own,  which  in its way  has become savage again, that is t o say devastated by difference and death.

It  is  in  this  way,  under  the pretext o f saving the original, that the  caves of Lascaux have been forbidden to visitors and an exact replica constructed 500 metres away, so that everyone can see  them (you  glance through a peephole at the real grotto  and then visit the reconstituted  whole). It is possible that the very memory of  the  original caves  will fade  in the  mind  o f future generations,  but  from now on there is no longer any difference: the duplication is sufficient to  render both artificial.

In the  same  way the  whole of science and technology  were recently  mobilised  to save the mummy of  Rameses 1 1 , after it had been left to  deteriorate  in  the  basement  of a

museum. The West was panic-stricken at the thought of   not being able to save what the symbolic order had been able to  preserve for 40 centuries,  but  away  from  the light  and gaze of  onlookers. Rameses means nothing t o   us: only  the  mummy  is  o f inestimable worth  since  it is what  guarantees  that accumulation means something. Out entire linear and accumulative culture would collapse if  we could not stockpile the past in plain view. To this end the  pharaohs must be brought out of their tombs, and the mummies out of  their  silence. To this end they  must  be  exhumed  and given military honors.  They are prey  to both science and the worms.  Only absolute secrecy ensured their  potency throughout the  milleniatheir mastery over putrefaction, which signified  a  mastery  over  the total  cycle of exchange with death. W e know better than  t o use  our  science  for  the rtpurution of the mummy,  that  is,  to restore a visible order, whereas  embalming  was  a  mythicaI  labor aimed at immortalising a hidden  dimension.

We need a visible past, a visible continuum,  a visible myth  of origin t o reassure us as to our ends, since ultimately

we have never believed in them. Whence that historic scene of  the mummy's  reception at Orly  airport.  All  because  Rameses  was  a great despot and military figure? Certainly: but  above  all  because  the order which  our that  defunct power  it  seeks  to  annex,  could  have  had nothing  to  do with  it,  and  it  dreams thus because  it  has  exterminated  this  order  by culture dreams  of, behind exhuming it US if  it were our own past.

We are fascinated by Rameses as Renaissance Christians were by the American Indians: those (human?)  beings who had never  known  the word of  Christ. Thus, at the  beginning  of  colonisation,  there was a moment  of  stupor  and  amazement  before the very possibility of escaping the universal law of  the Gospel. There were two possible responses:  either to  admit that this law was not universal, or to exterminate the Indians so as to remove the evidence. In general,  it was enough to  convert them, or even simply to  discover  them, to  ensure  their  slow ex  termination.

Thus  it  would  have  been  enough  to exhume Rameses to ensure his extermina-

tion  by  museumification. For mummies do not decay because of  worms:  they die from being transplanted from a prolonged symbolic  order,  which  is  master  over  death  and putrescence, on  to  an  order  o f history, science and museums-our own, which is no longer  master  over  anything,  since it  only knows how to condemn its predecessors  to death and putrescence and their subsequent resuscitation by science. An  irreparable violence towards all secrets, the violence of a civilisation without secrets. The  hatred by an entire civilisation for its own foundations.

And  just  as with  ethnology  playing at surrendering its object the  better to  establish itself  in its pure form, so museumification is only one  more turn in the spiral of artificiality. Witness the  cloister of St-Michel de Cuxa, which is going to be repatriated at great  expense  from  the Cloisters  in  New York  to be  reinstalled  on 'its original site'. And  everyone  is  supposed  to applaud  this restitution (as with the 'experimental campaign to win back the sidewalks' on the Champs-Elysees!).  However,  if  the exportation of the  cornices was  in effect  an arbitrary  act,  and  if  the Cloisters of  New

## Jean Baudriffard

York  are  really  an  artificial  mosaic  of all cultures (according  to  a logic of  the  capitalist centralisation of  value), then reimportation to the  original  location i s even moreartificial: it  is  a  total  simulacrum  that  links up with "reality"  by a complete circumvolution.

The cloister should have stayed in New York in its simulated environment, which at least would have fooled no  one. Repatriation is only a supplementary subterfuge, in order to  make out  as though nothing  had happened and to indulge in  a retrospective hallucination.

In the  same  way  Americans  flatter themselves  they  brought  the  number  of Indians  back  to  what  it  was  before  their conquest. Everything is obliterated only  to begin  again.  They  even  flatter  themselves they  went  one  better,  by  surpassing  the original figure. This is presented as proof of the  superiority  of civilisation:  it  produces more  Indians  than  they  were  capable  of themselves. By  a sinister  mockery, this overproduction is yet again a way of destroying them:  for Indian culture, like all tribal culture, rests on the limitation of  the group and prohibiting any of  its"unrestrict-

ed' growth, as can be seen in the case of Ishi. Demographic 'promotion',  threfore, is just one more step towards symbolic extermination.

We too live in  a  universe everywhere strangely similar to  the  originalhere things are duplicated by their own scenario. But this double  does  not  mean,  as  in  folklore,  the imminence of death-they are already purged of  death, and are even better than in life;  more smiling, more  authentic, in light of their model, like the faces in funeral parlors.

## Hypeveal and Imaginary

Disneyland  is a perfect model of  all the entangled  orders  of simulation.  To  begin with it is a play of  illusions and phantasms: Pirates, the Frontier, Future World, etc. This imaginary  world  is  supposed  to  be  what makes  the  operation  successful.  But  what draws the crowds is undoubtedly much more the social  microcosm,  the miniaturised  and religious revelling in real  America, in  its delights  and  drawbacks. You park outside, queue up inside,  and are totally abandoned at the exit. In this imaginary world the only phantasmagoria  is  in  the inherent warmth

and  affection  of the  crowd,  and  in  that sufficiently excessive  number  o f gadgets used there t o specifically maintain the multitudinous affect. The contrast with the absolute solitude of the  parking lot-a veritable  concentration  camp-is total.  Or rather: inside,  a  whole  range  of gadgets magnetise  the  crowd  into  direct  flowsoutside,  solitude  is  directed  onto a  single gadget: the automobile. By an extraordinary coincidence  (one that  undoubtedly  belongs t o   the  peculiar  enchantment  of this  universe), this deep-frozen infantile world happens to have been conceived and realised by  a  man  who is himself  now cryogenised: Walt Disney, who awaits his resurrection at minus 180 degrees centigrade.

The objective profile of  America,  then, may be traced throughout Disneyland, even down to the morphology of  individuals and the crowd. All its values are exalted here, in miniature and comic strip form. Embalmed and  pacified.  Whence  the possibility  o f   an ideological analysis o f   Disneyland (L. Marin does it well in Utopies, jeux d'espaces): digest of the  American way  of life,  panegyric  to American values, idealised transposition of  a

contradictory  reality.  To be  sure. But  this conceals something else, and that 'ideological'  blanket  exactly  serves  to cover  over  a third-order simulation: Disneyland  is  there to conceal the fact that it is the 'real' country, all  o f   'real'  America,  which i s Disneyland (just as prisons are there to  conceal the fact that it is the social in its entirety, in its banal omnipresence, which is cameral).  Disneyland is presented as imaginary in order to  make us believe that the rest is real, when in fact all  o f Los Angeles and the America surrounding it are no longer  real,  but o f   the order of  the hyperreal and of  simulation. It is no  longer a question of  a false representation of  reality (ideology), but o f   concealing the fact that the real is no longer real, and thus o f   saving the reality principle.

The  Disneyland  imaginary  is  neither true nor false; it is a deterrence machine set up  in  order  to  rejuvenate  in  reverse  the fiction o f   the real. Whence the debility, the infantile degeneration of this imaginary. I t   is meant to be an infantile world,  in order to make us believe that the adults are elsewhere, in the'real' world, and  to  conceal the fact that real childishness is everywhere,

particularly  amongst  those adults  who go there  to  act  the  child  in  order  to  foster illusions as to their real childishness.

Moreover,  Disneyland  is  not  the only one.  Enchanted  Village,  Magic  Mountain, Marine WorId: Los Angeles  is encircled  by these 'imaginary stations' which feed reality, reality-energy, t o   a  town  whose mystery is precisely that it is nothing more than  a  network  o f endless,  unreal  circulation-a town  of  fabuIous proportions,  but without  space or dimensions. As much as electrical  and  nuclear  power stations,  as much  as  film  studios,  this  town,  which  is nothing more than an immense script and a perpetual  motion  picture, needs  this  old imaginary made up of  childhood signals and faked phantasms for  its sympathetic  nervous system.

## I io  n

## Po Iif ita In t a n fa  f

Watergate. Same  scenario as Disneyland (an imaginary effect concealing that reality no  more  exists  outside  than  inside  the bounds of  the artificial  perimeter):  though here  it  is  a  scandal  effect  conceahg  that there is no  difference between the facts and

their  denunciation  (identical  methods  are employed by the CIA and the Washington Posf journalists).  Same  operation,  though  this time tending towards scandal as a means to regenerate  a  moral  and  political  principle, towards the imaginary as  a means  to regenerate a reality principle in distress.

The denunciation of scandal always pays homage to the law. And Watergate above all succeeded in imposing the idea that Watergate mus a  scandal-in this  sense it  was an extraordinary operation of  intoxication. The reinjection of a large dose  of political morality  on a  global  scale.  It could be  said along with Bourdieu that: "The specific character  of every  relation  of force  is  to dissimulate itself  as such, and to acquire all its force only because it is so dissimulated", understood  as  follows: capital, which is immoral and  unscrupulous,  can only  function  behind a  moral  superstructure,  and whoever regenerates this public morality (by indignation, denunciation, etc.)  spontaneously  furthers  the order of  capital,  as did  the Washington Post journalists.

But  this  is  still  only  the  formula  o f ideology,  and when Bourdieu enunciates it,

## Jean BaudriIIard

he takes're1ation o f   force' to mean the truth of   capitalist domination, and he denounces this relation of force as itself a scandal-he therefore  occupies  the  same deterministic and moralistic position as the Washington Post jounalists.  He does the same job of  purging and reviving moral order, an order of  truth wherein the genuine  symbolic  violence of  the social  order is  engendered, well  beyond  all relations of force, which are  only its indifferent and shifting configuration in the moral and political consciousness of  men.

All that capital asks of  us is to receive it as rational or t o  combat  it  in  the name of rationality, to  receive it as  moral or tocombat it  in  the  name  of morality. For they  are identical, meaning they  can  be  read  another  way: before,  the task was to dissimulate scandal; today,  the  task  is  to conceal  the fact  that there is none.

Watergate is not a scandal: this is what must be said at all cost, for this is what everyone is concerned to  conceal, this dissimulation masking a strengthening o f   morality, a moral panic  as we approach  the primal (mise en) scene of capital: its instantaneous cruelty, its incomprehensible ferocity,  its  fundamental

immorality-this is what is scandalous, unaccountable  for  in  that  system of  moral and economic equivalence which remains the axiom  o f leftist  thought,  from  Enlightenment theory to communism. Capital doesn't give a damn about the idea  of  the contract which  is  imputed  to it-it is  a  monstrous unprincipled undertaking, nothing  more. Rather,  it  is  'enlightened'  thought  which seeks t o   control capital by imposing rules on it. And all that recrimination which replaced revolutionary  thought today comes down to reproaching  capital  for  not  following  the rules  o f the  game.  'Power  is  unjust,  its justice  is  a  class justice,  capital  exploits  us, etc.'-as if  capital were linked by a contract t o  the  society  it  rules.  It is  the left  which holds out the mirror of  equivalence, hoping that capital will fall for this phantasmagoria of the social contract and fulfull its obligation towards  the whole of  society (at the same time,  no need for revolution:  it is enough that capital accept the rational formula o f   exchange).

Capital in fact has never beeen linked by a contract to the society it dominates. I t  is a sorcery of  the social relation, it is a challenge to

society and should be responded toas such. It  is not a scandal to be denounced according to moral and economic rationality, but a challenge  to take up according to symbolic law.

## Moebiws-Spiralling  Negatiuity

Hence Watergate was only a trap set by the system to catch its adversaries-a simulation o f   scandal to regenerative ends. This i s embodied  by  the  character  called 'Deep  Throat', who  was  said  to  be a Republican grey eminence manipulating the leftist  journalists in order  to  get  rid  o f Nixon-and why  not?  All  hypotheses  are possible,  although  this  one is  superfluous: the work of   the Right is done very well, and spontaneously, by the  Left on  its  own. Besides, it would be naive t o   see  an embittered  good  conscience  at  work  here. For  the Right itself also spontaneously does the work of  the Left. All the hypotheses of manipulation  are  reversible  in  an  endless whirligig. For manipulation  is  a  floating causality  where  positivity  and  negativity engender  and  overlap  with  one  another, where  there  is  no  longer  any  active  or

passive.  I t  is  by  putting an arbitrary stop to this  revolving  causality  that  a  principle  of political  reality  can  be  saved.  It  is  by  the simulation of  a  conventional,  restricted  perspective field, where  the  premises and consequences of any act or event are calculable,  that a  political  credibility  can  be maintained (including, of  course, 'objective' analysis, struggle, etc.).  But if the  entirecycle of  any act or event is envisaged in a system where linear continuity and dialectical polarity no longer exist, in a field unhinged by Simulation, then all determination evaporates, every act terminates at the end o f   the cycle having benefited everyone and been scattered in all directions.

Is any given bombing in Italy the  work  o f leftist extremists, or of  extreme right-wing provocation, or staged by centrists to bring every terrorist extreme intodisrepute  and to shore up its own failing power, or again, is it a police-inspired  scenario in order to appeal t o   public security?  All this is equally true, and the search for proof, indeed the  objectivity of the fact  does  not  check  this  vertigo  of interpretation. We are  in a logic of simulation which has nothing to do with -a logic of  facts

and an  order  of reasons. Simulation  is characterised by a precession of the model,  o f   all models around the merest fact-the models come first, and their orbital (like the bomb) circulation constitutes the genuine magnetic field  of events.  Facts  no  longer  have  any trajectory  of their  own,  they  arise  at  the intersection o f   the models; a single fact may even be engendered by all the  models at  once. This anticipation, this precession, this shortcircuit,  this  confusion  o f the  fact  with  its model (no more divergence of  meaning,  no more dialectical  polarity,  no more negative electricity or implosion of  poles) is what each time  allows  for  all  the  possible  interpretations,  even  the most  contradictory-all are true, in the sense  that their truth  is exchangeable,  in  the  image  of   the models from which  they  proceed,  in  a generalised cycle.

The  communists  attack  the  socialist party as though they wanted to shatter the Union  of  the Left.  They  sanction  the idea that their  reticence  stems  from  a  more radical political exigency. In fact, it is because they don't want power. But do  they not want it at this conjuncture because it is unfavor-

able for the Left in general, or because it is unfavorable  for  them  within  the Union of the Left-or do they not want it by definition? When  Berlinguer declares: 'We musn't  be frightened of  seeing the communists seize power in Italy', this  means simultaneously:

-that there is nothing to  fear, since the communists,  if they  come  to  power,  will change nothing in its fundamental capitalist mechanism,

-that there isn't any risk of  their ever coming to power (for the reason that they don't  want to)-and even if  they did take it up,  they will only ever wield  it by  proxy,

-that in fact power, genuine power, no longer exists,  and hence  there is no risk of anybody seizing it or taking it over,

-but more: I, Berlinguer, am  not frightened  of  seeing the communists seize power in Italy-which might appear evident, but not that much, since

-this can also mean  the contrary (no need of  psychoanalysis here): I am frightened o f seeing  the  communists  seize  power  (and with good reason, even for a communist).

All  the  above  is  simultaneously  true.

## Jean Baudrillard

This is  the secret of   a discourse that is  no longer only ambiguous, as  political discourses can be, but that  conveys the  impossibility o f  a determinate position o f   power, the impossibility o f   a determinate position o f   discourse. And  this  logic  belongs  to neither  party.  I t traverses all discourses without their wanting it.

Who  will  unravel  this  imbroglio? The Gordian knot can at least be cut. As for the Moebius strip, if it is split in two, it results in an additional spiral without there being any possibility of  resolving its surfaces (here  the reversible continuity of  hypotheses). Hades of simulation,  which  is  no  longer  one  of torture, but of   the subtle, maleficent, elusive twisting  of  meaning  4-where even  those condemned  at Burgos  are still  a gift  from Franco to  Westerndemocracy, which finds in them  the  occasion  to  regenerate  its  own flagging  humanism,  and  whose  indignant protestation consolidates in return Franco's regime by uniting the Spanish masses against  foreign  intervention? Where is  the truth in all that, when  such  collusions admirably knit together without their authors even knowing it?

The conjunction  of  the system and its extreme  alternative like two  ends of a curved mirror,  the 'vicious' curvature of   a political space  henceforth  magnetised,  circularised, reversibilised  from  right  ot  left,  a  torsion that is like the evil demon of  commutation, the  whole  system,  the  infinity  o f capital folded back over its  own surface: transfinite? And isn't it the same  with desireand libidinal space? The conjunction o f   desire and value, of desire  and  capital.  The conjunction  of desire  and  the  law-the ultimate  joy  and metamorphosis of  the law (which is why it is so well received at the moment): only capital takes pleasure,  Lyotard said, before coming to  think  that  we  take  pleasure  in  capital. Overwhelming versatility of desire in Deleuze, an enigmatic reversal which brings this  desire  that  is 'revolutionary  by  itself, and as if  involuntarily,  in wanting what it wants',  to want its own repression and to invest paranoid and fascist systems?  A malign torsion which reduces this revolution of   desire to the same  fundamental ambiguity as the other, historical revolution.

All  the  referentials  intermingle  their discourses in a circular, Moebiancompulsion.

## Jean  Baudrillard

Not so long ago sex and work were savagely opposed terms: today both are  dissolved into the  same  type  of demand.  Formerly  the discourse  on  history  took  its  force  from opposing  itself  to the  one on  nature,  the discourse on desire to the one on powertoday  they  exchange  their  signifiers  and their scenarios.

It  would  take too long to run through the whole range of operational negativity, of all those scenarios of  deterrence which,  like Watergate,  try  to regenerate  a  moribund principle  by  simulated  scandal,  phantasm, murder-a sort  of  hormonal  treatment  by negativity and crisis. It is always a question of  proving the real by the imaginary, proving truth by scandal, proving the  law by transgression,  proving  work by  the strike, proving the system by  crisis and capital by revolution, as for that matter proving ethnology by the dispossession of  its object (the Tasaday)-without counting:

-proving theatre by anti-theatre

-proving art by anti-art

-proving pedagogy by anti-pedagogy

-proving psychiatry by anti-psychiatry, etc.,  etc.

Everything  is  metamorphosed  into its inverse  in  order  to be  perpetuated  in  its purged  form.  Every  form of  power,  every situation speaks of itself by denial, in order to attempt to escape, by simulation o f   death, its real agony. Power can stage its own murder to  rediscover  a  glimmer  of existence  and legitimacy.  Thus with  the American  presidents:  the Kennedys are murdered because they still have a politicaldimension.0thersJohnson, Nixon,  Ford-only had  a  right  t o puppet attempts, to simulated murders. But they  nevertheless  needed  that  aura  of   an artificial  menace  to conceal  thay they were nothing other than mannequins of power. In olden days the  king(a1so the  god) had to  diethat  was  his  strength.  Today  he  does  his miserable utmost to pretend to die, so as to preserve the blessing of   power. But even this is gone.

To seek new blood in its own death, to renew  the  cycle  by  the  mirror  o f crisis, negativity  and  anti-power:  this  is  the only alibi  of every  power,  of every  institution attempting to break the vicious circle o f   its irresponsibility  and  its  fundamental  nonexistence, o f   its deja-vu  and its deja-mort.

## Strategy of the Real

Of the same  order  as  the  impossibility of rediscovering an absolute level of the real, is the impossibility of staging  an  illusion. Illusion is no  longer possible, because the  real is  no longer possible.  I t  is the whole political problem of  the  parody, of  hypersimulation or offensive simulation, which is  posed  here.

For example: it would be  interesting to see whether the repressive apparatus would not react more violently to  a simulated holdup than  to a  real  one? For the latter only upsets  the  order  of things,  the  right  of property, whereas the other interferes with the very principle  of  reality. Transgression and violence  are less serious, for they only con  test the distribution of   t h e   real. Simulation is infinitely more dangerous, however, since it always suggests, over and above its object, that lam and ordm themselues might ~eully be nothing more than  a simulation.

But the difficulty is in proportion to the peril. How to feign a violation  and put it to the test? Go and simulate a theft in a large department store: how do you convince the security guards that it is a simulated theft? There is no 'objective' difference: the same

gestures and the same  signs exist as for  a real theft; in fact the signs incline neither to  one far as the established order  is  concerned,  they are always of  the side nor the other. As order of  the real.

Go and organise a fake hold-up. Be sure t o  check  that  your  weapons  are harmless, and take the most  trustworthy hostage, so that no life is  in danger (otherwise you risk committing  an  offence).  Demand  ransom, and arrange it so that the operation creates the greatest commotion possible-in brief, stay close  to the 'truth', so as to test  the reaction of the apparatus  to  a perfect simulation. But you won't  succeed the web of  artificial  signs will  be  inextricably mixed up with real  elements (a police officer will really  shoot on sight;  a bank customer will faint and die of a heart attack; they will really turn  the  phoney  ransom  m e r  to you)-in brief, you  will  unwittingly find  yourself immediately in the  real, one  of whose functions is precisely t o   devour every attempt at simulation, to reduce everything t o   some  reality-that's exactly  how  the established order is, well before institutions and justice come into play.

## Jean Baudrillard

In this  impossibility of isolating  the process of simulation must be seen the  whole thrust  o f an  order  that  can  only  see  and understand in terms o f   some  reality, because it  can function nowhere else. The  simulation of   an offence,  if  it  is  patent,  will  either be punished  more  lightly  (because  it  has  no "consequences8?  or be punished as an offence to public office (for  example, if one triggered off  a  police  operation "for  nothing")-but never US  simulation, since it is precisely  as such that no equivalence with the real is possible, and hence no repression either. The challenge  of simulation  is  irreceivable  by power. How can you punish the simulation of  virtue? Yet as such it  is as serious as the simulation of crime. Parody makes obedience and transgression equivalent, and that is the most  serious  crime,  since  it  cancels out the difference upon which the law i s based. The established order can do nothing against it, for  the  law  is  a  second-order  simulacrum whereas  simulation  is  third-order,  beyond true and false, beyond equivalences, beyond the rational distinctions upon which function all power and the entire social. Hence,failing the real,  it is here that we must aim at order.

This is  why order always opts for the real. In  a  state  of uncertainty,  it  always prefers  this  assumption  (thus in  the army they would  rather  take  the simulator  as a true madman). But this becomes  more and more difficult, for it is practically impossible t o   isolate the process o f   simulation, through the force of inertia of the real  which surrounds us,  the inverse is also true (and this  very reversibility forms  part  o f the apparatus  of simulation  and  of power's impotency): namely, it  is now impossible to isolate the process of the  real, or t o  prove the real.

Thus all  hold-ups,  hijacks  and the like are now as it were simulation hold-ups,  in the sense that they are inscribed in advance in the decoding and orchestration rituals of the  media, anticipated  in  their  mode  of presentation  and possible consequences.  In brief,  where they  function as a set o f   signs dedicated  exclusively  to their recurrence as signs, and no  longer to  their 'real' goal at  all. But this does not make them inoffensive. O n the  contrary,  it  is  as  hyperreal  events,  no longer  having  any  particular  contents or aims, but indefinitely refracted by each other (for  that matter  like  so-called historical

## Jean  Baudrillard

events: st r i k e s , demonstrations, crises, etc. 5), that  they  are  precisely  unverifiable  by  an order which can only exert itself on the real and  the  rational, on  ends  and  means:  a referential  order which  can  only  dominate referentials,  a determinate power which can only dominate  a  determined world, but which  can do nothing about that indefinite recurrence of  simulation, about that weightless  nebula  no  longer  obeying  the  law  of gravitation of  the real-power itself eventu-I!y breaking apart in this space and becoming a simulation o f   power (disconnected from its  aims and objectives, and dedicated to power effects and mass simulation).

The  only  weapon  of power,  its  only strategy against this defection, is to reinject realness  and  referentiality  everywhere,  in order  to convince  us  of  the  reality  o f   the social, o f   the gravity o f   the  economy and the finalities of  production. For that purpose it prefers the discourse of crisis, but als-why not?-the discourse  of  desire.  'Take  your desires for reality!' can be understood as the ultimate slogan  of power,  for  in  a  nonreferential  world  even the confusion of  the reality  principle with  the desire principle  is

less dangerous than contagious hyperreality. One  remains  among  principles,  and  there power is always right.

Hyperreality  and  simulation are deterrents of every principle and of every objective; they turn  against power this deterrence which is so well utilised for a long time itself. For, finally,  it was capital which was the first to feed throughout its history on  the  destruction  o f every  referential,  of every  human  goal,  which  shattered  every ideal distinction between true  and false, good and evil, in order to establish a radical law of equivalence and exchange, the iron law of its power. It  was the first to  practice deterrence, abstraction,  disconnection,  deterritorialisation, etc.; and if it was capital which fostered reality,  the reality  principle,  it  was also the first to liquidate  it in the extermination of every use value, of every real equivalence, o f production and wealth, in the very sensation we have of  the unreality of the  stakes and the omnipotence of  manipulation. Now, it is this very  logic  which  is  today  hardened  even more against it. And when it wants  to fight this catastrophic spiral by secreting one last glimmer  of  reality,  on which  to found one

## Jean Baudrillard

last glimmer of  power, it only multiplies the signs and accelerates the play of  simulation.

As long as it was historically threatened by  the  real,  power  risked  deterrence  and simulation,  disintegrating  every  contradiction by means of the production of equivalent signs. When it is threatened today by simulation (the threat of  vanishing in the play  o f signs),  power  risks  the  real,  risks crisis,  it gambles on remanufacturing artificial, social, economic, political stakes. This is a question o f   life or death for it. But it is too late.

Whence  the  characteristic  hysteria  of our  time  the  hysteria  of  production  and reproduction of  the real. The other production, that o f   goods and commodities, that o f la belle epoque of  political economy, no longer makes any sense of  its own, and has not for some  time.  What  society  seeks  through production, and overproduction, is the restoration o f   the real which escapes it. That is  why contemporary 'material'  production  is  itself hyperreal. I t   retains all the features, the  whole discourse of   traditional production,  but it is nothing more than  its  scaled-down refraction (thus the hyperrealists  fasten in a striking

resemblance  a  real  from which  has fled all meaning and charm, all the profundity and energy of  representation). Thus the hyperrealism of simulation  is  expressed  everywhere by  the real's striking resemblance to itself.

Power, too, for some  time now produces nothing but signs of  its resemblance. And at the  same  time,  another  figure  of power comes into play:  that of a collective demand for signs of   power-a holy union which forms around the disappearance of  power. Everybody belongs to it more or less in fear o f the collapse  o f   the political.  And in the end the game of power comes down to nothing more than  the critical obsession  with  power-an obsession  with its death, an obsession with its survival, the greater the more it disappears. When it has totally disappeared, logically we will  be  under  the total spell o f power-a haunting  memory  already foreshadowed  everywhere,  manifesting  at one and the same time the compulsion to get rid of   it  (nobody wants it any more,  everbody unloads it  on others) and the apprehensive pining over its loss. Melancholy for societies without power: this has already given rise to

## lean Baudrillard

facism, that overdose of  a powerful referential  in a  society which cannot terminate its mourning.

But we are  still in the same  boat: noneof our  societies  knows  how  to  manage  its mourning  for  the  real,  for  power,  for  the social ifself, which  is  implicated  in this  same breakdown. And it is by an artificial revitalisation of  all this that we try to escape it. Undoubfedly  this will even end u p  in socialism. By an unforeseen twist of  events and an irony which  no  longer  belongs  to  history, it  is through the death o f   the social that  socialism will  e m e r g e a s  it  is  through  the death of God that religions emerge. A twisted coming,  a  perverse  event,  an  unintelligible reversion to the logic of  reason. As is the fact that  power  is  no longer  present  except  to conceal  that  there  is  none.  A  simulation which  can go on indefinitely, since-unlike "true"  power which is, or was, a structure, a strategy, a relation of  force, a stake-this is nothing but the object of  a social demund, and hence  subject  to  the  law  o f supply  and demand,  rather than to violence and death. Completely expunged from the political dimension,  it  is  dependent,  like  any  other

commodity,  on  production  and  mass  consumption. Its  spark  has  disappeared-only the fiction of  a political  universe is saved.

Likewise with work. The  spark  of production, the  violence of its  stake  no longer exists. Everybody  still produces, and more and more, but work has subtly become something  else:  a  need  (as  Marx  ideally envisaged it, but not at all in the  same  sense), the object of  a  social 'demand,' like leisure, t o   which it is equivalent in the  general  run  o f life's options. A demand exactly proportional to the loss  of  stake in  the work process. 6 The samechange in fortune as for power: the scenario of  work is  there to conceal the fact that the work-real,  the production-real,  has disappeared. And for that matter so has the strike-real  too, which is no longer a stoppage of  work, but its alternative pole in the ritual scansion  of the  social  calendar.  It  is  as  if everyone has 'occupied' their work place or work  post,  after  declaring  the  strike,  and resumed  production,  as is  the custom in a 'self-managed' job, in exactly the  same terms  as  before,  by  declaring  themselves (and virtually being) in a state of permanent strike.

## Jean Baudrillard

This isn't a science-fiction dream: everywhere it is a question of  a doubling o f the work process. And of  a double or locum for  the  strike  process-strikes which  are incorporated like obsolescence in objects, like crisis in production. Then there is no longer any strikes or work, but bothsimultaneously, that  is t o   say  something  else  entirely:  a wizardry of work, a trompe l'oeil, a  scenodrama (not t o   say melodrama)  of production, collective dramaturgy upon the empty stage of  the social.

I t   is no  longer a question of the ideology of work-of the traditional ethic that obscures the 'real' labour process and the  'objective' process of  exploitation-but of  the scenario of   work. Likewise, it is no longer a question of  the ideology of  power, but of thescmario of power. Ideology only corresponds t o   a betrayal of reality by signs; simulation corresponds to a short-circuit of  reality and t o   its reduplication by signs. It is always the aim  of ideological  analysis  to  restore  the objective process; it is always a false problem to want  to restore  the  truth  beneath  the simulacrum.

This  is  ultimately  why power  is  so in

accord with ideological discourses and discourses  on  ideology, for  these  are  all discourses of  truth-always good,  even and especially if they are revolutionary, t o counter the mortal blows of  simulation.

## The End of the Panopticon

It is  again to this  ideology  of  the lived experience, of  exhumation, of   the real in its fundamental banality, in its radical authenticity,  that  the American  TV-verite experiment  on the Loud  family  in 1971 refers: 7 months of uninterrupted shooting. 300 hours of direct non-stop broadcasting, without script or scenario, the odyssey of  a family, its dramas, its joys, ups and downsin brief, a'raw' historical document, and the 'best thing ever on television, comparable, at the level o f   our  daily existence, to  the film o f the lunar  landing.' Things are complicated by the fact that this family came  apart during the  shooting:  a  crisis  flared  up,  the Louds went their separate ways, etc. Whence that insoluble controversy: was TV responsible? What would have happened if TV  hadn't  been there.

More  interesting  is  the  phantasm  of filming the Louds as if  TV wasn't there.  The producer's  trump  card  was  to say:  'They lived  as  if we  weren't  there'.  An  absurd, paradoxical formula-neither true, nor false: but utopian.  The 'as if  we weren't  there' is equivalent to'as if you were there'. I t   is this utopia, this paradox that fascinated 20 million viewers, much more than the 'perverse' pleasure of prying. In this'truth' experiment, it is neither a question of secrecy nor of perversion, but of a kind of thrill of the real,  or o f   an aesthetics of  the hyperreal,  a thrill o f   vertiginous and phony exactitude, a thrill of  alienation  and  of  magnification,  o f distortion in scale, of excessive transparency all at the same time. The joy in an excess of meaning, when  the  bar  o f the  sign  slips below the regular water line of meaning: the non-signifier  is elevated by the  camera angle. Here  the  real  can  be  seen  to have  never existed (but 'as if you were there'), without the  distance which produces perspective space and our depth vision (but 'more true than nature'). Joy in the microscopic simulation  which  transforms  the real  into the hyperreal. (This is also a little like what

happens in porno, where fascination is more metaphysical than sexual.)

This  family  was  in  any  case  already somewhat hyperreal by its very  selection: a typical,  California-housed,  3-garage,  S-children,  well-to-do  professional  upper  middle class  ideal  American  family  with  an  ornamental housewife. In a way, it is .this statistical perfection which dooms  it  to death.  This  ideal  heroine  o f   the American way of  life is chosen, as in sacrificial rites, to be glorified and todie  under the fiery glareof the  studio lights,  a  modern  fatum. For  the heavenly  fire  no  longer  strikes  depraved cities, it is rather the  lens which cuts through ordinary  reality  like  a  laser,  putting  it  to death.  'The  Louds:  simply  a  family  who agreed to deliver themselves into the hands of television,  and  to die  from  it',  said  the producer. So it is really a question  o f a sacrificial  process, of a  sacrificial  spectacle offered to 20 million Americans. The liturgical drama of a mass society.

TV-veri te. Admirable am  bivalent terms: does it refer to the truth of this family, or to the truth of TV? In fact, it is TV which is the Loud's  truth,  it  is  it  which  is  true,  it  is  it

which  renders  true. A truth  which  is  no longer the reflexive truth o f   the mirror, nor the perspective truth o f   the panoptic system and of  the gaze, but the manipulative truth of  the test which probes and interrogates, of the laser which touches and then pierces, o f computer cards which retain your punchedout  sequences,  of the  genetic  code  which regulates your combinations,  of  cells which inform  your  sensory  universe. It is  to this kind of truth that  the  Loud family is subjected  by  the  TV  medium,  and  in  this sense it really amounts to a death sentence (but is it still a question of  truth?).

The end off he panoptic system. The  eye  of TV is no longer the source of  an absolute gaze, and the ideal of  control is no longer that o f transparency. The latter still presupposes an objective space (that  of  the  Renaissance) and the omnipotence of  a despotic gaze. This is still, if not a system of confinement, at  least a system  of  scrutiny.  No  longer  subtle,  but always in a position of exteriority, playing on the  opposition  between  seeing  and  being seen, even if the  focal  point of the  panopticon may be blind.

It  is  entirely  different  when  with  the

Louds 'You no longer watch  TV,  TV watches you (live),' or again: 'You no  longer listen to Pas de Panique, Pas de Panique listens to you'-switching over  from  the  panoptic apparatus  of surveillance  (of Discipline  and Punish) to a system of  deterrence, where the distinction between  active  and  passive  is abolished. No longer is there any imperative to submit to the model, o r t o   the  gaze.'YOU are  the  model!' 'YOU are  the  majority!' Such is the slope of  a hyperrealist sociality, where the real is confused with the model, as in the statistic operation, or with the medium, as in the Loud's operation. Such is the later stage of  development  of  the social relation, our own, which is no longer one of persuasion (the classical age of  propaganda, ideology, publicity, etc.)  but  one  of dissuasion or deterrence: 'YOU are news, you are  the  social,  the  event  is  you,  you  are involved,  you  can  use  your  voice,  etc.' A turnabout  of affairs  by  which  it  becomes impossible to  locate an instance o f  the  model, of  power,  of  the gaze, of  the medium itself, since you are always  already  on  the other side. No more subject, focal point, center or periphery: but pure flexion o r circular

## Jean Baudrillard

inflection. No more violence or surveillance: only 'information,'  secret  virulence,  chain reaction,  slow  implosion  and  simulacra of spaces  where  the  real-effect again  comes into play.

We are  witnessing the endof perspective and panoptic  space (which remains a moral hypothesis  bound  up  with  every  classical analysis of  the'objective' essence of power), and  hence  the DV abdifion of the spectacular. Television,  in  the  case  of the  Louds  for example, is no longer a spectacular medium. We are no longer in the society o f   spectacle which the situationists talked about, nor in the specific types o f   alienation  and  repression which  this implied. The medium itself  is no longer identifiable as such, and the merging of  the medium and the message (McLuhan7) is the first  great  formula o f this  new age. There is no longer any medium in the literal sense: it is now  intangible, diffuse  and diffracted  in  the  real,  and it  can  no longer even be said that the latter is distorted by it.

Such immixture, such a viral, endemic, chronic,  alarming presence of  the medium, without our being able t o   isolate its  effects-

spectralised,  like those publicity  holograms sculptured in empty space with laser beams, the  event filtered by the  medium-the dissolution of  TV into life, the dissolution o f life into TV-an indiscernible chemical solution:  we  are all  Louds,  doomed  not  to invasion,  to  pressure, to  violence  and  to blackmail by the media and the models, but to their induction, to their infiltration, to their illegible violence.

But we must be careful of  the negative twist  discourse  gives  this:  it  is  a  question neither of  an illness nor of a viral complaint. Rather, we must think of the media as if they were,  in  outer orbit,  a  sort of  genetic code which controls the mutation of  the real into the hyperreal,  just as the other, micromole cular code controls the passage of  the signal from a representative sphere of  meaning to the genetic sphere  o f  the  programmed signal.

The whole traditional mode of causality is  brought  into  question:  the  perspective, deterministic mode, the  "active," critical mode,  the analytical  mode-the distinction between  cause  and  effect, between  active and  passive,  between  subject  and  object, between  ends and means. It is in this mode

that  it  can  be  said TV watches  us,  TV alienates us, T V  manipulates us, T V   informs us. .  . Throughout all this one is dependent on the analytical conception whose vanishing point  is  the  horizon  between  reality  and meaning.

On the contrary, we must imagine TV on the DNA model, as an effect in which the opposing poles of determination vanish according to a nuclear contraction or retraction of  the old polar schema which has always maintained a minimal distance between a cause and an effect, between the subject and an object: precisely, the meaning gap, the  discrepancy, the  difference,  the smallest possible margin of error, irreductible under penalty of  reabsorption in an aleatory and indeterminable process which discourse can  no longer  even  account  for,  since it  is itself  a determinable order.

It  is  this  gap  which  vanishes  in  the genetic coding process, where indeterminacy is  less  a  product  o f   molecular  randomness than  a  product  of the  abolition,  pure  and simple,  of the  relation. In  the  process of molecular  control,  which  'goes'  from  the DNA nucleus to the'substance' it'informs,'

there is no more traversing  of an  effect, o f  an energy, o f a determination, of  any message. 'Order,  signal, impulse,  message': all these attempt to render the matter intelligible to us, but by analogy, retranscribing  in terms  o f inscription, vector, decoding, a dimension of which  we  know  nothing-it is  no  longer even  a  'dimension,'  or  perhaps  it  is  the fourth (that which  is  defined,  however,  in Einsteinian  relativity,  by  the absorption o f the distinct poles o f   space and time). In fact, this whole process only makes sense to us in the  negative  form.  But  nothing  separates one pole from the other, the initial from the terminal there is  just a sort o f   contraction into  each  other,  a  fantastic  telescoping,  a collapsing o f   the two traditional poles into one another: an IMPLOSION-an absorption of the  radiating  model  o f   causality,  of  the differential mode o f   determination, with its positive and negative electricity-an implosion of   meaning. This is where simulation  begins.

Everywhere, in whatever political,  biological,  psychological, media domain, where the distinction between poles can no longer be  maintained,  one enters into simulation, and  hence  into absolute manipulation-not

passivity,  but  the non-disfindion of acfiue and passiue. DNA realises this aleatory reduction at the level of the living substance. Television itself, in the  example  of  the  Louds, also  attains  this indefinite limit  where  the family uis-a-uis TV are no more or less active or passive than is a living substance uis-a-uis its molecular  code.  In  both  there is only  a nebula  indecipherable  into  its  simple  elements, indecipherable as to its truth.

## Orbital and Nuclear

The nuclear is the apotheosis of simulation. Yet  the  balance  o f terror  is nothing more than the spectacular slope of a system o f   deterrence that has crept from the inside into all  the  cracks  o f daily  life.  The nuclear cliff-hanger only seals the trivialised system  o f deterrence  at  the  heart  o f the media,  o f   the inconsequential violence that reigns throughout the world, o f   the aleatory contrivance  of  every  choice  which  is  made for us. The  slightest details of our  behaviour are ruled  by  neutralised,  indifferent,  equivalent  signs,  by  zero-sum  signs like  those which  regulate  'game  strategy'  (but  the genuine  equation  is elsewhere,  and  the

unknown is precisely that variable of simulation which  makes the atomic arsenal itself  a hyperreal form, a simulacrum which dominates  us  all  and  reduces  all 'groundlevel'  events to mere ephemeral scenarios, transforming  the  only  life  left  to us into survival,  into a wager without  takers-not even  into a  death policy:  but  into a  policy devaluated in advance).

It isn't  that the direct menace of atomic destruction  paralyses  our lives.  It is  rather that  deterrence  leukemises  us.  And  this deterrence  come  from  the  very  situation which excIudes the real atomic clash-excludes it beforehand like the eventuality of  the real in a system  of signs.  Everybody  pretends  to believe  in  the  reality  o f this  menace  (one understands  it  from  the  military  point  of view, the  whole  seriousness of their exercise, and  the discourse of  their 'strategy,'  is at stake):  but  there are precisely  no strategic stakes at this level, and the whole originality of   the situation lies in the improbability of destruction.

Deterrence excludes war-the antiquated violence of expanding systems. Deterrence is the neutral, impIosive violence

of   metastable or involving systems. There is no  subject  of deterrence  any  more, nor adversary,  nor  strategy-it is  a  planetary structure  of the annihilation of stakes. Atomic war,  like that of  Troy,  will not take place.  The risk o f   nuclear atomisation only serves as a pretext, through the sophistication of  arms-but this sophistication exceeds any possible objective to such an extent that it is itself  a  symptom  o f nonexistence-to the installation of a universal system o f   security, linkup,  and  control  whose  deterrent  effect does not aim for atomic clash at all (the  latter has  never  been  a  real possibility,  except  no doubt right at the beginning of the  cold war, when the nuclear posture was confused with conventional war) but really the much larger probability  o f any  real  event,  of  anything which could disturb the general system and upset  the balance.  The balance  o f   terror  is the terror of  balance.

Deterrence is not a strategy. It  circulates and is exchanged between the nuclear protagonists exactly like international  capital in that orbital zone o f   monetary speculation, whose flow is sufficient to control all global finance. Thus k i l l   m o n e y (not referring to real

killing,  any more than floating capital refers to  real  production)  circulating  in  nuclear orbit is sufficient  to control all violence and potential  conflict on the globe.

What stirs in the shadow of this posture, under  the pretext  of   a  maximal 'objective' menace, and thanks to that nuclear sword of Damocles, is the  perfection of the  best system o f   control  which  has  never  existed. And  the  progressive satellisation of the whole planet by that hypermodel of security.

The same goes for peaceful nuclear installations. Pacification doesn't distinguish between the civil and the military: wherever irreversible apparatuses of control are elaborated, wherever the notion o f   security becomes  absolute,  wherever  the nurm of security replaces the former arsenal of  laws and violence (including war), the system of deterrence  grows,  and  around  it  grows an historical,  social and political desert. A huge involution makes every conflict, every opposition,  every act of  defiance contract in proportion  to  this  blackmail  which  interrupts, neutralises and freezes  them.  No mutiny, no  history  can  unfurl  any  more according to  its  own  logic  since  it  risks

annihilation. No strategy is even possible any more,  and escalation is only a puerile game left to the military. The  political stake  is dead. conflict  and  carefully

Only  simulacra  of circumscribed stakes remain.

The"space race"p1ayed exactly the same role as the nuclear race. This is why it was so easily able to take over from it in the '60's (Kennedy/Khrushchev), or t o  develop concurrently in a mode of"peacefu1 coexistence." For what is the  ultimate function of the space race,  of   lunar conquest,  of  satellite launchings,  if not  the  institution  of a  model  of universal gravitation, o f   satellisation, whose perfect embryo  is the lunar module: a programmed microcosm, where nothing cun be left tochunce? Trajectory, energy, computation, physiology,  psychology,  the environmentnothing can be left to  contingency, this is the total  universe  of the  norm-the Law  no longer exists, it is the  operational immanence of every  detail  which  is  law. A universe purged  o f every  threat  to the senses,  in  a state  o f   asepsis and  weightlessness-it is this very perfection which is fascinating. For the exaltation of   the masses was not in response to the lunar landing or the voyage of  man in

space  (this  is  rather  the  fulfillment  o f   an earlier dream)-no, we are dumbfounded by the perfection of their planning and technical manipulation,  by  the immanent wonder of programmed development. Fascinated by the maximisation of  norms and by the mastery of   probability. Unbalanced by the model, as we are by death, but without fear or impulse. For if the law, with its aura o f   transgression, if  order, with its aura o f   violence, still taps a perverse  imaginary,  then  the  norm  fixes, hypnotises, dumbfounds, causing every imaginary to involve. We no  longer fantasise about  every minutia of a program.  Its observance alone unbalances. The vertigo of a flawless world.

The same model of  planned infallibility, of maximal  security  and  deterrence,  now governs the spread of  the social. That is the true  nuclear  fallout: the  meticulous  opera  tion of technology  serves  as  a  model  for  the meticulous operation of  the  social. Here, too, nothing mill be left to chance; moreover, this is the essence  of socialisation,  which has  been going on for some centuries but which has now  entered  into  its  accelerated phase, towards a  limit  people  imagined  would  be

## lean Baudrillard

explosive (revolution), but which currently results  in  an  inverse,  irreversible, imglosiue process:  a  generalised  deterrence of  every chance,  of  every  accident,  o f every  transversality,  o f   every finality,  o f   every contradiction, rupture or complexity in a sociality illuminated by the norm and doomed to the transparency  o f detail radiated  by  datacollecting mechanisms. In fact, the spatial and nuclear  models do not even have their own ends: neither has  lunar  exploration,  nor military and  strategic  superiority.  Their truth lies in their being models o f   simulation, vector  models of a  system  of planetary control (where  even the super-powers of this scenario  are not  free-the whole world  is satellised). 8

Reject  the evidence:  with satellistation, the  one who is  satellised is  not whom you might  think.  By  the orbital inscription of  a space  object,  the  planet  earth  becomes  a satellite,  the  terrestrial  principle  of  reality becomes  excentric,  hyperreal and insignificarft.  By the  orbital  establishment of a system of  control like peaceful coexistence, all  terrestrial  microsystems  are  sateIlised and  lose  their  autonomy.  All  energy,  all

events are absorbed by this excentric gravitation,  everything  condenses  and  implodes on the micro-model of  control alone (the orbital  satellite),  as  conversely,  in  the other, biological dimension everything converges and implodes on the  molecular micromodel of  the genetic code. Between the two, caught between the nuclear and the genetic, in  the simultaneous assumption of  the two fundamental codes of deterrence, every principle of meaning  is absorbed, every deployment of  the real is  impossible.

The simultaneity  of  two events in July 1975 illustrates  this  in  a  striking way:  the linkup  in  space  o f   the  two American  and Soviet super-satellites, apotheosis  o f  peaceful existence-and the suppression by the Chinese o f   character writing and conversion to the Roman alphabet. This latter signifies the "orbital"  establishment  of  an  abstract and model system of  signs, into whose orbit will be reabsorbed all those once remarkable and singular forms of  style and writing. The satellisation o f   their tongue:  this is the way the  Chinese  enter  the  system  of   peaceful coexistence, which is inscribed in their sky at

## Jean Baudrillard

the very same time by the docking of the  two satellites. The orbital flight of  the Big Two, the  neutralisation  and  homogenisation  of everybody else on earth.

Yet, despite this deterrence by the orbital authority-the nuclear code or molecular-events continue at ground level, mishaps  are  increasingly  more  numerous, despite the global process o f   contiguity and simultaneity of data. But, subtly, these events no longer  make any sense; they are nothing more than a duplex effect  o f simulation at the summit. The best example must be the Vietnam war, since it was at the crossroads of a maximal historical or 'revolutionary' stake and the installation of this deterrent authority. What sensedid that war make, if not that its unfolding sealed the end of history in the  culminating and decisive event of our age?

Why  did such  a difficult, long  and arduous war vanish overnight as if by magic?

Why  didn't  the  American  defeat  (the greatest  reversal  in  its  history)  have  any internal repercussions? If it had truly signified a setback in the planetary strategy

of  the  USA, it  should  have necessarily disturbed the internal balance of the American political system. But no such thing happened.

Hence something else took place.  Ultimately this war was only a crucial episode in a peaceful coexistence. It marked the advent of   China  to peaceful  coexistence. The long sought-after  securing  and  concretising  of China's  non-intervention,  China's  apprenticeship in a global modus oioendi, the passing from a strategy of world revolution tooneof a sharing of forces and empires, the transition from a radical alternative to political alternation in a now almost settled system  (normalisation of  Peking-Washington relations): all  this  was  the  stake  of the Vietnam  war,  and  in  that  sense,  the USA pulled out o f   Vietnam but they won the war.

And the war'spontaneous1y'came  toan end  when  the  objective  had  been attained. This is why it was de-escalated, demobilised so easily.

The effects of  this same remolding are legible in the field. The war lasted as long as there  remained unliquidated  elements  irreducible to  a healthy politics and a discipline

of  power,  even  a  communist  one.  When finally the  war passed from the  rersistance t o the  hands  o f regular  Northern  troops,  it could stop: it had attained its objective. Thus the  stake  was  a  political  relay.  When  the Vietnamese  proved  they  were  no  longer bearers  o f an  unpredictable  subversion,  it could be handed over to them. That this was communist order wasn't fundamentally serious:  it  had proved  itself, it  could  be trusted.  They are even more effective than capitalists in liquidating  'primitive' precapitalist and antiquated structures.

Same scenario as in the Algerian war.

The other aspect of  this war and o f   all wars since:  behind  the armed violence,  the murderous antagonism between adversarieswhich seems a matter of  life and death, and which is played as such (otherwise  you could never send out people  to get smashed up in this kind o f   trouble), behind this simulacrum of a struggle to death and of  ruthless global stakes, the two adversaries are fundamentally as one against that other, unnamed,  never mentioned  thing,  whose objective outcome in  war,  with  equal complicity  between  the two adversaries,  is  total  liquidation.  It  is

tribal,  communal,  pre-capitalist  structures, every form of exchange, language  and symbolic organisation which  must be  abolished. Their  murder  is  the object  of  warand in its immense spectacular  contrivance of  death,  war  is  only  the  medium  o f this process  o f terrorist  rationalisation  by  the social-the murder through which sociality can be founded, no matter what allegiance, communist or capitalist. The  total complicity or division of labourbetween  twoadversaries (who can even make huge sacrifices to reach that) for the very purpose of  remolding and domesticating social relations.

'The  North Vietnamese were advised to countenance a scenario of  the liquidation of the American  presence  through  which,  o f course, honour must be preserved.'

The  scenario: the extremely heavy bombardment of Hanoi. The  intolerable nature of  this  bombing  should  not conceal the  fact  that  it  was  only  a  simulacrum  to allow the Vietnamese toseem tocountenance a compromise and  Nixon t o   make  the Americans swallow the retreat of their forces. The game was already won, nothing was objectively at stake  but the credibility of

the final montage.

Moralists about war, champions o f  war's exalted values should not be greatly upset: a war is  not any the less  heinous for being a mere simulacrum-the flesh suffers just the same,  and the dead ex-combatants count as much there as in other wars. That objective is always amply accomplished, like that  o f  the partitioning of   territories and o f   disciplinary sociality. What no  longer exists is the adversity of adversaries, the reality of antagonistic causes,  the ideological seriousness  of  war-also the  reality  o f   defeat or victory,  war being a process whose triumph lies quite  -beyond these appearances.

In  any  case,  the pacification (or deterrence) dominating us  today  is  beyond  war and peace,  the simultaneous equivalence o f peace and war. 'War is peace,'  said Orwell. Here, also, the two  differential  poles implode into each  other, or recycle one another-a simultaneity  of  contradictions  that  is  both the parody and the  end of all  dialectic. Thus it is possible to  miss the truth  of a war: namely, that  it was  well  over  before  reaching  a conclusion,  that  at  its  very  core,  war  was

brought to an end, and that perhaps it never ever began. Many other such events (the  oil crisis,  etc.) nmer began,  never existed, except that artificial mishaps-abstracts, ersatzes  of troubles, catastrophes and crises intended to maintain a historical and psychological investment  under  hypnosis.  All  media  and the official news  service only exist to maintain  the  illusion  o f actuality-of the reality of  the stakes, o f   the objectivity o f   the facts.  All  events are to be  read  in  reverse, where one  perceives(as  with thecommunists in power' in Italy, the posthumous, 'nostalgic' rediscovery of  gulags and Soviet dissidents like the  almost  contemporary rediscovery, by a moribund ethnology, of the lost 'difference'  of   Savages)  that  all these things  arrive too  late, with  an  overdue history,  a  lagging  spiral,  that  they  have exhausted their meaning long in advance and only survive on an artificial effervescence  of signs, that all these events follow on illogically  from  one  another,  with  a  total equanimity towards the greatest inconsistencies,  with  a  profound  indifference to their consequences (but this is because there are none  any  more: they  burn  out  in  their I,.

spectacular promotion)t  h u s the  whole newsreel of  'the present' gives the sinister impression of  kitsch,  retro and porno all at the same timedoubtless everyone knows this, and nobody really accepts it. The  reality of simulation  is  unendurable-more cruel than Artaud's Theatre of Cruelty, which was still an attempt at a dramaturgy of  life, the last flickering o f   an ideal o f   the body, blood and  violence  in  a  system already sweeping towards  a  reabsorption  o f all  the  stakes without a trace of  blood. For us the trick has been  played.  All  dramaturgy,  and  even  all real writing of cruelty has  disappeared. Simulation  is master, and  nostalgia, the phantasmal parodic rehabilitation of  all lost referentials,  alone  remain.  Everything  still unfolds before  us, in the  cold light of deterrence (including Artaud, who is entitled like  all  the  rest  to his  revival,  to a  second existence as the referential of  cruelty).

This  is  why  nuclear  proliferation  increases neither  the chance of  atomic clash nor of  accident-save in the interval where 'young'  powers  could  be  tempted  to use them  for  non-deterrent or 'real' purposes (like the Americans  did on Hiroshima-but

precisely they alone were  entitled to  this"use value" of  the bomb, while all those who  have since acquired it are  deterred from using it by the very fact o f  its possession). Entry into  the atomic club, so amusingly named, very rapidly removes (like syndicalisation for the working world) any inclination towards violent intervention. Responsibility, control, censorship, self-deterrence always increases faster  than  the forces or weapons  at our disposal: this is the secret of  the social  order. Thus  the  very  possibility  o f paralysing  a whole country with the flick of a switch makes it  impossible  that  electrical  engineers  will ever utilise this weapon:  the entire myth of the revolutionary and total strike  collapses at the very moment when the means to so are available-but alas, exactly  because the means to do so are available. This is deterrence in a nutshell.

Therefore it is altogether likely that one day we shall see the nuclear powers exporting  atomic  reactors, weapons  and bombs to every  latitude.  After  control  by threat will succeed the much more effective strategy o f   pacification by  the bomb and by its  possession. "Small" powers, hoping to  buy

## Jean Baudrillard

their independent strike force, will only buy the virus of deterrence, of their  own deterrence.  The  same goes  for  the atomic reactors we have already sent them: so many neutron  bombs  knocking  out all  historical virulence,  all risk of   explosion. In this sense, the  nuclear  system  institutes a universally accelerated  process  of implosion, it  conceals everything  around  it,  it  absorbs  all  living energy.

The nuclear system is both the culminating point of available energy and the maximisation of systems controlling all energy. Lockdown and control grow as fast as (and  undoubtedly even faster  than) liberating potentialities. This  was already the aporia  o f   modern revolutions. It is  still the absolute  paradox of the  nuclear  system. Energies freeze by their own firepower, they deter themselves. One can't really see what project,  what  power,  what  strategy,  what subject could possibly be behind this enclosure, this vast saturation  o f   a system  by its own  hereafter  neutralised, unusable, unintelligible,  non-explosive  forces-except the possibility o f an explosion totoards the cmfer, of an implosion where all  these  energies  are

abolished  in a catastrophic  process  (in  the literal sense,  that  is  to say in  the sense o f a reversion o f the  whole cycle towards a minimal  point, of a reversion  o f energies towards a minimal threshold).

Translated by Paul Foss and Paul Patton

## Notes

1. Cf. J.  Baudrillard, L'tchangc symboliquc d la mort , ('L'ordre  des simulacres''), Paris, Gallimard, 1975.

2. And which  is not susceptible to resolution in transference.  It  is  the  entanglement  of  these two discourses which makes psychoanalysis interminable.

3. Cf. M. Perniola, 'Icones, Visions, Simulacres,' Travcrscs/s/o, p. 39.

4. This does not necessarily  result in a despair of meaning,  but  just  as  much  in  an  improvisation  o f meaning,  o f nonsense,  or  of  several  simultaneous senses which cancel each other out.

5. The energy crisis, the ecological  setting,  by and large, are themselves a disaster film,  in the same style (and of  the same value) as those which currently do so well  for  Hollywood.  It  is  pointless  to  laboriously interpret  these  films  by  their  relationship  with  an

'objective'  social crisis, o r even with an 'objective' phantasm of  disaster. It is in the other direction that we must say it is thrsocial itself  which, in contemporary discourse, is organisd according to a script for a disaster film. (Cf.  Makarius,  'La strategie  de  la  catastrophe,' Traumes/lO, p. 15.

6. To this  flagging  investment  in  work  corresponds a parallel declining investment  inconsumption. Goodbye to use value or prestige of  the automobile, goodbye to  the amorous discourse  which made a clearcut distinction between the object o f   enjoyment and the  object  o f work.  Another  discourse takes  over, which  is  a discourst of work on the  objecf of consumption aiming at an active, compelling, puritan reinvestment (use less gas, look t o   your security, speed is obsolete, etc.), t o   which automobile  specifications  pretend to  be adapted: rediscovering a stake by transposition of the poles. Thus work becomes the object o f   a need, the car becomes the object o f work-no better proof o f   the inability  to distinguish  the stakes. It is  by  the very swing of voting 'rights' to electora1'duties' that the disinvestment o f   the political sphere is signaled.

7. The mediumlmessage confusion, of course, is a correlative  o f the  confusion  between  sender  and receiver, thus  sealing  the  disappearance  o f  all the  dual, polar structures which formed the discursive organisation of  language, referring to the celebrated grid of  functions in Jacobson, the organisation o f   all determinate articulation o f meaning. 'Circular' discourse must be taken literally: that is, it no longer goes from one point to the other but describes a circle

that indisfincfly incorporates the positions of  transmitter and receiver, henceforth unlocatable as such.  Thus there  is no  longer  any  instance  of power,  any transmitting  authority-power is  something  that circulatesand  whosesource can no longer be located, a cycle  in  which  the  positions  o f   dominator  and  the dominated interchange in an endless reversion which is also the end o f   power in its classical  definition. The circularisation  of power,  knowledge  and  discourse brings every localisation o f   instances and poles to  an end. Even in psychoanalytic interpretation, the "power"  o f   the interpreter  does  not come from any external authority,  but  from the interpreted themselves.  This changes everything,  for we can  always ask the traditional holders of  power where they get their power  from. Who made you Duke? The King. And who made the King? God. God alone does not reply.  But  to  the question:  who  made  the psychoanalyst? the analyst quite easily replies: You. Thus is expressed, by an inverse simulation, the  passage from the  "analysed" t o   t h e   "analysand," from  active to passive,  which  only  goes  to describe  the swirling, mobile effect of  the poles,  its effect of  circularity in which  power  is  lost,  is  dissolved,  is  resolved  into complete manipulation (this is no longer of  the order of the directive authority  and the gaze,  but  o f   the order of personal contact and commutation).  See, also, the  Statelfamily circularity  secured  by  the  floating and metastatic regulation of images of the social and the private. (J.  Donzelot,  The Policing of Families)

From now on, it is impossible to ask the famous

## lean Baudrillard

question:

"From  what position do you speak?"-

"How do you know?"-

"From  where do you get the power?",  without immediately getting the reply: "But  it is of(from)  you that I speak"-meaning, it is you who speaks, is is you who knows, power is you. A gigantic circonvolution, circumlocution  of  thespoken word, which amounts  to irredeemable blackmail and irremovable  deterrence  of the subject supposed to  speak, but left without a word to  say, responseless, since to questions  asked can come the inevitable  reply:  but you urc the  reply, o r : your question is already an answer,  etc.-the whole sophistical stranglehold of word-tapping, forced confession disguised as free expression, trapping the subject in  his own questioning, the precession of  the reply  about  the  question  (the  whole  violence  of interpretation is there, and  the  violence  of the conscious or unconscious self-management  of "speech).

This simulamm of inversion or involution of  poles, this clever  subterfuge which is  the secret o f   the whole discourse  of manipulation  and  hence,  today,  in every domain,  the secret  o f   all  those  new  powers sweeping clean the stage o f   power,  forging the assumption o f   all speech from which comes  that fantastic silent majority characteristic  of our  times-all this  undoubtedly  began  in  the  political  sphere  with  the democratic simulacrum,  that  is t o   say  with  the substitution  o f the  instance  of the  people  for the instance of God  as  source  of power, and  the substitution  of  power  as representation for  power as

## The Precession of Simulacra

emanation. An  anti-Copernican revolution:  no longer any  transcendent instance  nor  any  sun  nor  any luminous  source  of  power and  knowledge-everything comes from and returns to the people. It is this magnificent recycling that the universal simulacrum of manipulation,  from the scenario of  mass suffrage to present-day  and  ilusory  opinion  polls,  begins  to be installed.

8. Paradox: all  bombs  are  clean-their only pollution  is  the system o f   control and security they radiate when f h c y arc not dctonated.

The Orders o f   Simulacra

Three orders o f   appearance,  parallel to the  mutations  o f the  law  of value,  have followed one another since the Renaissance:

-Counferfeif i s the dominant  scheme of the "classical"  period,  from the Renaissance to the industrial revolution;

-Production is  the dominant  scheme of the industrial era;

-Simulation is  the  reigning  scheme  o f the current phase that is controlled  by  the code.

The first order of  simulacrum is based on  the  natural  law  of  value,  that  o f the second order on  the  commercial law of value, that of the  third  order on the structural  law of   value.

## The Stucco Angel

Counterfeit  (and  fashion  at  the same time) is born with the Renaissance, with the

## Jean  Baudrillard

destructuring  of  the  feudal  order by the bourgeois order and the emergence of  open competition  on the level of  the distinctive signs. There is no such thing as fashion in a society  o f   cast and rank, since  one  is assigned a  place irrevocably,  and so class mobility is non-existent.  An  interdiction  protects  the signs and assures them a total clarity; each each sign then refers unequivocally to a status. Likewise no counterfeit is possible with the ceremony-unless as black magic and sacrilege,  and  it  is  thus  that  any  confusion  o f signs is punished: as grave infraction o f   the order o f   things. If  we are starting to  dream again,  today  especially, o f a  world  o f   sure signs, o f   a strong"symbo1ic order," make no mistake about it: this order has existed and it was  that of a  ferocious  hierarchy, since transparency and cruelty for signs go together. In caste societies, feudal or  archaic, cruel societies, the signs  are limited in number, and are  not widely diffused, each  one functions with its full value as interdiction, each is a reciprocal obligation  between castes, clans or persons. The signs therefore are  anything but arbitrary.  The arbitrary sign  begins  when,  instead  of  linking  two

persons  in  an  unbreakable  reciprocity,  the enchanted universe o f   thesignified, common denominator of  the real world toward which signifier  starts  referring  back to  the  disno one has any obligation.

End  of the  obliged  sign, reign  o f the emancipated sign, thakall classes will partake equally of. Competitive democracy succeeds the endogomy of  signs proper to statutory order. At  the same time we pass,  with the transfer o f   valueslsigns o f   prestige fromone class  to another,  necessarily  into counterfeit. For we have passed  from a limited order of signs, which prohibits"free production,"  to  a proliferation  of  signs according to demand. But the sign multiplied no longer resembles in  the slightest  the obliged sign of  limited diffusion: it is its counterfeit, not by corruption of  an "original",  but by extension of   a material whose very clarity depended on the restriction  by  which  it  was  bound.  No longer  discriminating  (it  is  no  more  than competitive), unburdened  of  all  restraint, universally  available,  the  modern  sign still simulates  necessity  in  taking  itself  as  tied somehow  to the world.  The  modern  sign dreams of  the signs of  the past  and would

well appreciate finding again, in its reference to the  real,  an obligation:  but  what  it  finds again is only a reason:  this referential reason, this real,  this 'natural' off  which it is going to live. But this bond of  designation is only the  simulacrum  of symbolic  obligation:  it produces  neutral  values  only,  that  can  be exchanged  in  an  objective world. The sign here suffers the same destiny as work. The 'free' worker is free  only t o   produce equivalents-the 'free  and  emancipated sign  is  free  only  to produce  the  signs  o f equivalence.

It is  therefore  in  the simulacrum of  a 'nature'  that  the  modern  sign  finds  its value.  Problematic  o f   the 'natural,'  metaphysics o f   reality and appearance: that is the history of  the bourgeoisie since the Renaissance, mirror o f   the bourgeois  sign, mirror of the  classical  sign.  And  still  today  the nostalgia for a natural referent o f   the sign is still  alive,  in  spite  o f   the revolutions that have  come to break  up this  configuration, including one  in production, where the  signs refer no longer to  any nature, but only to  the law of exchange, and  come  under the commercial law of  value.

It is  in  the Renaissance that the false is born alwg with the natural. From the fake shirt  in  front  to  the  use  o f the  fork  as artificial  prosthesis,  to the stucco interiors and the great baroque theatrical machinery. The  entire classical era belongs par excellence to the theatre. Theatre is the form which takes over social life and all of  architecture from the Renaissance on. It's there, in the prowesses  of  stucco and  baroque art,  that you  read  the methapysic of  the counterfeit and the new  ambitions  of Renaissance man-those of  a worldly demiurge, a transubstantiation  of all  of  nature  into  a  unique substance,  theatrical  like  social life unified under the sign of  bourgeois values, beyond all  differences  in  blood,  rank,  or  of  caste. Stucco means  democracy  triumphant  over all artificial signs, the apotheosis o f   theatre and fashion, and it betrays the new classes' infinite capabilities, its power to  do  anything once it has been  able to break through the exclusiveness of   signs. The way lies open to unheard-of  combinations,  to all the games, all the counterfeits-the Promethean verve of the  bourgeoisie  first  plunged  into  the imitation of nature before throwing itself  into

production. In the churches and palaces stucco is  wed  to all  forms,  imitates  everythingvelvet  curtains, wooden  corniches, charnel swelling  of  the  flesh.  Stucco exorcizes the unlikely  confusion  o f matter  into a  single new substance, a sort of  general equivalent of   all the others, and is prestigious theatrical ly because  is  itself a  representative  substance, a mirror of  all the others.

But  simulacra  are  not only  a  game played with signs; they imply social rapports and social power. Stucco can come off as the exhaltation of a rising science and technology;  it  is  also  connected  to  the  baroquewhich in turn is tied to the enterprise of the Counter  Reformation  and  the  hegemony over the political and mental world that the Jesuits-who were the first to act according t o  modem conceptions of   power-attempted to establish.

There is a strict correlation between the mental  obedience of  the Jesuits ("pwinde ac cadauer") and the  demiurgic  ambition t o exorcize the natural substance of  a thing in order to substitute a synthetic  one.  Just  likea man submitting his will to his organization, things take on the ideal functionality of  the

cadaver. All technology, all technocracy are incipiently there: the  presumption of an  ideal counterfeit  o f   the world,  expressed  in  the invention of  a universal substance and of  a universal  amalgam  o f substances.  Reunify the scattered world (after the Reformation) under the aegis  o f   a homogenous doctrine, universalize  the world  under a single word (from New  Spain  to Japan:  the Missions), constitute a political elite of the state, with an identically centralized strategy: these are  the objectives of  the Jesuits. In order to accomplish this,  you need to  create  effective simulacra: the apparatus of  the  organization is  one, but  also is clerkly  magnificence and the theatre (the great theatre of the cardinals and grey eminences). And training and education  are  other  simulacra that aimed, for the first time ever in a systematic manner, at remodeling an ideal nature from a  child.  That  architectural  sauce o f   stucco and baroque is a great apparatus of the same kind.  All o f   the above precedes  the productivist  rationality  o f   capital,  but  everything testifies  already-not in  production,  but in counterfeit  to the  same project  of  control and universal hegemonyto  a social scheme

where the internal coherence of a system is already at work.

Once there lived in the Ardennes an old cook, to whom the molding of  buildings out of  cakes and the science of  plastic patisserie had given the  ambition  to  take  up  the creation of   the world where God had left it, in  its  natural  phase, so as to eliminate its organic  spontaneity  and  substitute for it a single,  unique  and  polymorphous  matter: Reinforced  Concrete: concrete  fur  nit  ure, chairs,  drawers, concrete sewing machines, and  outside in  the  courtyard, an  entire orchestra, including violins, of  concrete-all concrete!  Concrete  trees  with  real  leaves printed into  them, a hog  made  out  of reinforced  concrete,  but  with  a  real  hog's skull inside, concrete  sheep  covered with real wool.  Camille Renault had finally found the original  substance,  the  paste  from  which different things can only be distinguished by 'realistic'  nuance:  the hog's skull, leaves o f the  tree-but this  was  doubtless  only  a concession of   the  demiurge to  his visitors .  .  . for it was with an  adorable  smile  that this 80year-old  god received visitors to  his creation: He sought no  argument  with  divine  creation;

he was remaking it  only to render  it more intelligible.  Nothing  here  of a  Luciferan revolt, or a will-to-parody,  or o f   a desire to espouse the cause  o f   naive art.  The  Ardennes cook  reigned  simply  over  a  unified  mental substance (for concrete is a mental substance; it  allows, just like a concept, phenomena to be  organized  and  divided  up at  will).  His project  was  not so far  from  that  of the builders  in  stucco o f   baroque art,  nor very different from the projection on the terrain of   an urban community in the current great ensembles. The counterfeit  is  working, so far, only on substance and form, not yet on relations  and  structures.  But  it  is  aiming already,  on  this  level,  at  the  control  o f a pacified society, ground up into a synthetic, deathless  substance:  an  indestructible artifact that will guarantee  an  eternity o f   power. Is it not man's  miracle to  have invented, with plastic,  a nondegradable material, interrupting thus the cycle which, by corruption and death, turns all the earth's substances ceaselessly  one into another? A substance out-of-the-cycle; even  fire  leaves  an indestructible  residue.  There is  something  incredible about it, this simulacrum where  you

## Jean Baudrillard

can see in a condensed form the  ambition of a gniversal  semiotic.  This  has  nothing to do with the 'progress' of  technology or with a rational  goal  for  science. It is  a  project  of political  and cultural hegemony, the fantasy of a  closed  mental  substance-like those angels of  baroque stucco whose extremities meet in a curved mirror.

## The Automation of the Robot

A whole  world  separates these  two artificial beings. O n e   is a theatrical counterfeit, a mechanical and clock-like man; technique submits entirely to analogy and to the effect of semblance. The  other  is dominated  by  the  technical  principle;  the machine overrides all, and with the machine equivalence  comes  too. The automaton plays the part  of  courtier  and  good  company;  it participates in the  pre-Revolutionary French theatrical  and  social  games.  The robot,  on the other  hand,  as his  name indicates,  is  a worker:  the theatre is over and done with, the  reign  of  mechanical  man  commences. The automaton  is  the analogy of   man  and

remains  his  interhutor (they  play  chess together!).  The machine is  man's equimdent and annexes him to itself  in the unity of  its operational  process.  This  is  the difference between a simulacrum of  the first order and one of  the second.

We shouldn't make any mistakes on this matter for reasons o f   'figurative' resemblance between robot and automaton. The latter is an interrogation upon  nature,  the mystery of  the existence or non-existence of the  soul, the dilemma of  appearance and being.  It is like  God:  what's  underneath  it  all,  what's inside,  what's  in  the  back  of  it?  Only  the counterfeit men allow these problems to be posed.  The  entire  metaphysics  o f man  as protagonist of the nuturd theatre of the creation  is  incarnated  in  the  automaton, before  disappearing  with  the  Revolution. And  the  automaton  has  no other  destiny than  to  be  ceaselessly  compared  to living man-so as to be more natural than him, of which he is the ideal figure. A perfect double for  man,  right  up to the suppleness of  his movements,  the functioning  of  his  organs and intelligence-right up to touching upon the  anguish  there  would  be  in  becoming

aware that  there is  no difference,  that the soul  is  over  with  and  now  it  is  an  ideally naturalized  body  which  absorbs its energy. Sacrilege.  This  difference  is  then  always maintained,  as  in  the  case  of  that  perfect automaton  that  the  impersonator's  jerky movements on stage imitate; so that at least, even if the roles were reversed, no  confusion would  be  possible.  In  this  way  the  interrogation of  the automaton remains an open one,  which  makes  it  out  to  be  a  kind  o f mechanical optimist, even if the counterfeit always connotes something diabolical. 1

No such thing with the robot. Therobot no longer interrogates  appearance;  its only truth  is  in  its  mechanical  efficacy.  It is  no longer  turned  towards a resemblance with man, to whom  furthermore  it  no  longer bears comparison. That infinitesimal metaphysical difference, which made  all the charm  and  mystery  of the automaton,  no longer exists; the robot has absorbed it for its own  benefit. Being and  appearance  are melted into a common substance of  production  and work. The first-order  simulacrum never  abolished  difference.  I t  supposes  an always  detectable  alteration  between  sem-

blance and reality (a particularly subtle  game with  trompe-l'oeil painting, but  art  lives en  tirely  off  of   this  gap). The second-order simulacrum  simplifies  the  problem  by  the absorption  of the  appearances,  or  by  the liquidation of   the real,  whichever.  It establishes  in  any  case  a  reality,  image,  echo, appearance; such is certainly work, the machine, the system of industrial production in its entirety, in that it is radically opposed to  the  principle  o f theatrical  illusion.  No more resemblance or lack of resemblance, of God, or human being, but an imminent logic of  the operational principle.

From  then on,  men  and  machines can proliferate.  It is  even  their  law  to do sowhich  the  automatons  never  have  done, being  instead  sublime and singular  mechanisms.  Men  themselves  only  started  their own  proliferation  when  they  achieved  the status of machines, with the  industrial revolution. Freed from all resemblance, freed  even  from  their  own  double,  they expand  like  the  system  o f production,  of which they are only the miniaturized equivalent. The revenge o f   the simulacrum that feeds the myth of the sorcerer's

## Jean Baudrillard

apprentice  doesn't  happen  with  the  automaton. It is, on the other hand, the very law of the  second  type;  and  from  that  law proceeds still the hegemony of  the robot, of the  machine,  and o f   dead  work over living labor.  This  hegemony  is  necessary  for  the cycle  of  production  and  reproduction.  It is with  this reversal that we leave behind  the counterfeit t o   enter (re)production.  We leave natural law and the play of  its forms to enter  the  realm  o f the  mercantile  law  of value and its calculations of  force.

## The Industrial  Simu lacrum

It  is  a  new  generation  of signs  and objects  which  comes  with  the  industrial revolution.  Signs  without  the tradition  of caste, ones that will never have known any binding  restrictions.  They  will  no  longer have to be counterfeited, since they are going t o   be produced all at  once on  a gigantic scale. The problem  of  their  uniqueness, or their origin, is no  longer a matter of concern; their origin is technique, and the only sense they possess is in the dimension of  the industrial simulacrum.

Which is to say the series, and even the possibility  of  two or  of n identical  objects. The relation between them is no longer that of an  original  to  its  counterfeit-neither analogy nor reflection-but equivalence, indifference. In  a  series,  objects  become undefined simulacra one of  the other. And so, along with the objects, do the men that produce  them. Only the obliteration of  the original reference allows for the generalized law  of equivalence,  that  is  to say  the oery possibility of production.

The entire analysis o f   production changes according to whether you no longer see in it an original process, or even one that is at the core of  all the others, but on the contrary a process  of absorption  of  all  original  being and of  introduction  to a series of  identical beings. Until now we have considered production and work as potential, as force, as historical  process,  as  generic  activity;  the energetic-economic myth proper to modernity. We  must  now  ask  if production  does  not interfere in the  order of signs, as  a particular phase-if it is not basically only an  episode  in the  line of  simulacra:  that  precisely  when, thanks  to  technique, potentially  identical

beings are produced in an indefinite series.

The immense energies that are at work in  technique,  industry,  and  the  economy should  not  hide  the fact  that it  is  basically only a matter of  attaining to that indefinite reproductibility.  That is  the challenge  certainly  to the 'natural' order,  but finally  is only a second-order  simulacrum, and rather inadequate as an imaginary  solution to the problem  of  mastering  the world.  By  comthe counterfeit  (the time of  the double and the mirror, of  theatre and the games of  mask and appearance), the serial and technical era of  reproduction is alllesser  scope  (the era  that parison  to the era  o f in-all  a  time  o f follows-that of   models of   simulation and of third-order  simulacra-is of  more considerable dimension).

I t   is Walter Benjamin who, in The Workof Art in  fhe Era of its Technical Reproductibilify, elicited the  implications essential in principle  o f first this reproduction.  He  shows  that reproduction absorbs the process of  production,  changing its finalities and altering the status of  product and producer. He demonstrates this  mutation on the terrain of  art, cinema and photography, because it is there

that  open  up, in  the  20th  century,  new territories  without  a  tradition  o f classical productivity, and that are placed immediately under the sign of reproduction. But we know that today all material production enters into this sphere. We know that now it is on the level of  reproduction (fashion, media, publicity, information  and  communication  networks), on the level o f   what Marx negligently called  the nonessential  sectors of  capital (we can hereby take stock of the  irony of history), that is to say in the  sphereof simulacra andof the code,  that the global process of  capital is founded. Benjamin first (and later McLuhan) understood  technique  not  as  a 'productive force'  (wherein  mamist  analysis  is  locked) but  as  medium,  as  form  and  principle  o f a whole  new  generation  o f sense.  The  fact alone  that  anything  might  be  simply reproduced,  as such, in two copies, is already a revolution;  you  only  have  to consider  the shock of  the African  native seeing,  for  the very  first  time, two identical books. That these two products  of technique  should  be equivalent under the sign o f   socially necessary work  is less important  in the long run than the serial repetition o f   the same object (which

is  also that of   individuals  as force-of-work). Technique  as  medium  dominates  not  only the 'message' of  the product (it's use-value) but also the force-of-work that Marx wished to make the revolutionary message of production. Benjamin and McLuhan saw this matter more clearly than Marx; they saw the true message: the h e ultimatum wus in  reproduction itself.  And that production  no longer has any sense;  its  social finality  is  lost  in  the series. The simulacra win out over history.

Furthermore, this  stage  of serial reproduction (that  o f   the  industrial  mechanism, of   the factory belt, o f   expandedreproduction) is ephemeral. As soon as dead work wins out over living work-that is, as soon as the era of primitive  accumulation  is over-serial production yields to generation by means of models. And here it is a question of a reversal of   origin and finality, for all the  forms  change once  they  are  not  so  much  mechanically reproduced but even conceived  from f h e point-ofv i m of their very reprodudibilify, diffracted from a generating nucleus we call the model. Here we are in  the third-order  simulacra;  no longer that of  the counterfeit o f   an original as in the first-order,  nor  that of  the pure series as in

the second. Here are the models from which proceed all forms according to the modulation of their  differences.  Only  affiliation to  the model  makes  sense,  and nothing flows any longer  according  to  its  end,  but  proceeds from the model, the 'signifier of  reference,' which  is a kind  o f   anterior finality and the only resemblance there is. We are in simulation in the modern sense of  the word, of which  industrialization  is  but  the  final manifestation. Finally,  it is not  serial  reproductibility which  is  fundamental, but the modulation.  Not  quantitative  equivalences, but distinctive oppositions. No longer the law of capital,  but  the  structural  law  of value. And not only shouldn't we look to technique or the economy for the secrets of  the code; it is,  on  the  contrary,  the  very  possibility  of industrial production that we should look for in  the genesis of the code and the simulacra. Each  order  submits  to the order  following. Just  like  the  order  of  the  counterfeit  was abolished by that of  serial production (wecan see how art has passed entirely into  the  realm of  the 'mechanical'?,  so in the same way the entire order of  production is in the process of tumbling into operational simulation.

The analyses of  Benjamin and McLuhan are situated on these limits of  reproduction and simulation, at the  point where referential reason  disappears,  and where production  is no longer sure of  itself.  In  this  sense they mark  a  decisive  progress  compared  to the analyses of  Veblen and Goblot. These latter, describing for example the signs of   fashion, still  refer  to the classical configuration:  the signs  constitute  a  distinct  material,  have  a finality  and  use  for  prestige,  status,  social differentiation. They  manifest  a  strategy contemporaneous t o that of profit and merchandise with Mam, at a time when you could still talk about the use-value of a sign or of  force-of-work,  when  purely  and  simply, one could still talk about an economy because there was  still a  Reason  o f   the sign,  and a Reason of  production.

## The Mefaphysic of the

## Code

'Leibniz, that mathematical spirit, saw  in  the  mystic  elegance  o f the  binary  system  that  counts only the zero and the one, the very image  of creation.  The unity of the  supreme  Being, operating by binary function in nothingness, would have sufficed to bring out o f   it all the beings.'

--McLuhan

The great  simulacra constructed by man pass  from  a  universe  o f natural  laws  to a universe o f   force  and tensions o f   force, today to a universe o f   structures and binary oppositions. After the metaphysic o f   being and appearance, after that o f   energy and determination, comes that o f   indeterminacy and the  code. Cybernetic control,  generation  from  model,  differential modulation,  feed-  back,  ques  t  ion/  answer,  e  tc.: such  is  the  new operufional configuration  (industrial simulacra are  only operational). Digitality  is  its  metaphysical  principle  (the God o f Leibniz), and DNA its prophet. I t   is in effect in the  genetic code that the'genesis o f  simulacra'

today  finds  its most  accomplished form. At the limit of an always more  extensive abolition  o f references  and  finalities,  of  the loss o f   resemblance and designation, we find the digital  program-sign, whose  value  is purely tactical, at the intersection o f   the  other signals  (corpuscles  o f information/  test)  and whose structure is that of  a macro-molecular code o f   command and control.

At this level the question of signs, of their rational  destination,  their  real  or imaginary, their repression,  their  deviation,  the illusion they  create  or  that  which  they  conceal,  or their parallel meanings-all of  that is erased. We have already seen signs of  the first order, complex  signs  and  rich  in  illusion,  change, with  the  machines,  into  crude  signs,  dull, industrial, repetitive, echoless, operational and efficacious. What a mutation, even more radical still, with signals of  the code, illegible, with  no gloss possible, buried  like programmatic matrices light-years away in the depths of  the 'biological' body-black boxes where all the  commandments, all the  answers ferment! End o f   the  theatre  of representation, the space o f   signs, their conflict, their silence; only the black box o f   the code, the molecular

emitter o f   signals from which we have been irradiated, crossed by  answerslquestions  like signifying  radiations,  tested continuously by our own program  inscribed  in the cells. Jail cells, electronic cells, party cells, microbiological  cells:  always  the  search  for  the smallest  indivisible element,  whose  organic synthesis  would  be  made  according  to the givens of   the code. But the code itself is but a genetic  cell,  a  generator  where  myriads  o f intersections  produce  all  the  questions  and possible solutions, so that choices (by whom?) can be made. No finality involved with these "questions" (informational and signifying impulsions)  but  the  answer,  genetically  unchangeable or inflected by minute and aleatory differences. Space is  no longer even linear  or  one-dimensional:  cellular  space,  indefinite  generation o f   the same signals,  like the tics o f   a prisoner gone  crazy with solitude and repetition.  Such is  the genetic code:  an erased record, unchangeable, o f   which we  are no  more  than  cells-for-reading.  All  aura  o f sign,  of  significance itself  is  resolved  in this determination; all is resolved in the inscription and decodage.

Such is  the third-order  simulacrum, our

own. Such is the'mystic elegance of the  binary system, of  the zero and the one', from which all being proceeds. Such is the  status  of thesign that  is  also the end o f   signification: DNA or operational simulation.

All of   this is perfectly well summed up by Sebeok ('Genetics and Semiotics', in Ve r s u s ) :

Numerous  observations  confirm  the hypothesis that the internal organic world descends in a straight line  from the primordial forms of life. The  most remarkable fact is the omnipresence of  the DNA molecule. The  genetic material of all organisms  known  on  earth  is  in  great measure  made  up o f   the nucleonic  acids DNA  and  RNA  that  contain in their information structure, transmitted by reproduction from one  generation t o another and furthermore gifted with the capacity o f   self-reproductionand imitation. Briefly,  the  genetic  code  is  universal,  or almost.  Its  deciphering  was  an  immense discovery, in the sense that it showed that 'the two languages of  the great polymers, the language of  nucleonic acid and that of protein, are  tightly correlated' (Crick, 1966; Clarck/Narcker, 1968); The Soviet mathematician  Liapounov  demonstrated in 1963 that all living systems transmit by prescribed  canals  with  precision  a  small

quantity of  energy or of matter containing a  great  volume of  information,  which  is responsible  for  the  ulterior  control  of  a great  quantity  of  energy  and  matter.  In this  perspective  numerous  phenomena, biological  as  well  as  cultural  (stockage, feed-back,  canalization  o f messages  and others)  can be seen as  aspects of the treatment of information. In the  last analysis information appears in great part as the repetition of information, or even as another  sort  of information, a  sort  o f . control that  seems  to  be a universal property of  terrestrial life, independent of form or substance.

Five years ago I drew attention to the convergence  of  genetics and linguisticsautonomous disciplines, but parallel in the larger  field of  communication science (of which animal semiotics alsi is a part). The terminology  of  genetics is  full o f   expressions taken from linguistics and communication theory (Jacobson, 1968 ) , which also underlined  either the major resemblances o r the important  differences of  structure and of function between genetic andverbal codes. .  . I t   is obvious today that the  genetic code must be considered the most fundamental of  all  the semiotic networks,  and therefore  a  prototype of all  the  other systems  of   signaling that animals use, man

included. From this point of view, molecules which  are systems of quanta and behave like stable vehicles of physical information, systems of  animal semiotics  and cultural systems,  including  language,  constitute a continuous chain  of  stages,  with  always more complex energy levels, in the framework of  a universal unique evolution. I t  is therefore possible  to describe  either  language  or  living  systems  from  a  unified cybernetic point-of-view.  For the present, this is only a useful analogy ora prediction. A reciprocal rapprochement  between  animal communication and linguistics can lead to a complete  knowledge  of  the  dynamics  of semiotics,  and  such  a  knowledge  can  be revealed,  in the last analysis,  to be nothing less than the very definition of  life.

And  so the current  strategic model  is designed  that  everywhere is  replacing  the great  ideological  model  which  constituted political economy in its time.

You will find it under the rigorour sign of 'science'  in  the Chance  and  Necessity of Jacques  Monod. The  end  of  dialectical evolution,  it  is  the  discontinuous  indeterminism of the  genetic code that now controls life-the teleological  principle.  Finality  no longer belongs to  the term; there  is no  longer

a term, nor a determination. Finality is there beforehand,  inscribed  in  the code. We see that nothing has changed-simply the order of   ends yields to the play of  molecules,  and the order of signifieds t o   the play of infinitesimal signifiers, reduced to  their aleatory commutation. All the transcendant finalities  reduced t o   a  dashboard  full  of instruments.  There  is  still,  however,  recourse  to  a  nature,  to  an  inscription  in "biological"  nature-in actuality,  a  nature distorted  by  fantasy  like  she always  was, metaphysical  sanctuary  no longer of  origin and substance, but this time of the code; the code must  have an "objective"  basis. What could  be  better  for  that  purpose  than  the molecule and genetics? Monod is the strict theologian  of  this molecular transcendance, Edgar  Morin  the  rapt  disciple  (A.D.N.* + Adonai!). But for one  as well as the  other, the fantasy of  the code,  which  is  equivalent to the reality of power, is merged with molecular  idealism.

Thus we find once more in history that delirious illusion of  unting the world under

'D.N.A.

the  aegis  o f a  single  principle-that of a homogenous substance with  the Jesuits of the Counter  Reformation; that of the genetic code with the technocrats of biological science (but also linguistics as well), with Leibniz and his binary divinity as precursor. For the program here aimed at has nothing genetic about it,  it is a social and historical program.  That  which  is hypostatized  in biochemistry  is  the  ideal  o f   a  social  order ruled  by  a  sort  of  genetic  code of  m a c r e molecular  calculation,  o f   P.P.B.S.  (Planned Programming Budgeting  System), irradiating  the  social  body with  its  operational circuits.  The technical  cybernetic  finds  its 'natural  philosophy'  here,  as Monsd says. The  fascination  of the  biological,  of the biomedical dates from the  very beginnings of science. I t   was at  work  in Spencerian organicism  (sociobiology)  on  the  level  of second-  and third-order  structures (Jacob's classification  in  The Logic of Life, it  is  active today in modern biochemistry,  on the level of structures of   the fourth-order).

Coded  similarities  and  dissimilarities: that is certainly  the image of  cyberniticized social exchange. You  only have  to  add

'stereospecific  complex' in order to  re-inject intracellular communication; that Morin will come to transfigure into molecular Eros.

Practically and historically, this signified the substitution of  social control by  the end (and by  a  more or  less  dialectical prmidence which  surveys the accomplishment  of  this end) for social control by anticipation, simulation  and programming,  and indeterminate mutation directed by Instead of a process which  is finalized according t o its ideal development, generalize from a model. prophecy,  we have  the right  of registration. become fantastically perfected. From capitalist-productivist society to a neothe biological theorization of the  code. we Instead of  a right toa There is no really radical difference  between the two,  only the schemes of control have a capitalist cybernetic order that aims now at total control. This is the mutation for which the  code prepares the ground. There is nothing of an accident in this mutation. I t  is the end o f   a history  in  which,  successively,  God,  Man, Progress, and History itself die to profit the code,  in  which  transcendance dies to profit immanence,  the  latter  corresponding to a

much more advanced phase in thevertiginous manipulation of  social rapports.

In  its  indefinite reproduction,  the system puts an end to the myth o f   its origin and to  all the referential values it has itself secreted  along the  way. Putting  an  end  to  its myth  of beginning,  it  ends  its  internal  contradictions (no more real or referential  to be  confronted with), and it puts an end also to  the  myth o f   its own  end:  the  revolution itself.  What  was profiled  with  revolution  was  the victory  o f human and generic reference, of  the  original potential of  man. But if  capital erases from the map  generic  man  himself  (for  the  sake  of genetic man?) the Golden Age of  the revolution  was that  of  capital,  where the myths o f origin  and  end  still  circulated.  Once  shortcircuited the myths (and  the  only danger capital confronted  historically  came  to  it  from  this mythical exigency of  rationality  that  accompanied it from the  very beginning) inanoperationality of  fact and without discourse, once capital itself  has  become its own myth,  or rather an interminable machine, aleatory, something like  a social genetic code, it no  longer leaves any  room  for  a  planned  reversal;  and  this is its true violence. It remains to be seen if this

operationality is not itself a myth, if DNA is not also a myth.

Once and for all there is posed, in effect, the problem of  science as discourse. A good occasion to pose it here, where this discourse is absolutized with such  candor.  'Plato, Heraclitus,  Hegel,  Marx:  these  ideological edifices,  presented  as u priori, were  really u posteriori constructions,  destined  to justify a  preconceived  ethico-political  theory . . . The only R priori for science is the postulate o f objectivity, that  forbids itself  any  part  in this debate.' (Monod).  But this postulate results itself from  a  never innocent decision for objectification o f   the  world and  o f   thel'real.'  In fact it is the coherence of  a certain discourse, and all scientific movement is nothing but the  space of   this discourse, never revealing itself as such, and the 'objective' simulacrum of which hides the political, strategic word. A little farther on, furthermore,  Monod very well expresses  the arbitrary  nature  of this  phenomenon:  'We might wonder if  all the invariance, conservations and symmetries that constitute  the scheme of  scientific  discourse are only fictions substituted for reality so  as to  offer an operational  image. . . A logic  founded  on  a

## Jean  Baudrillard

purely  abstract  principle o f identity  possibly conventional. Convention, however, that human reason seems incapable  of doing  without.' You couldn't say it better that science has selected itself as generating formula, a model discourse, upon the faith o f   a conventional order (not  just any,  however;  that  o f total  reduction).  But Monod  slides rapidly into  this  dangerous hypothesis  o f   a 'conventional' identity  principle. It would be better to base science, more crudely, upon an 'objective' reality. Physics is there to  witness that identity is only a postulate-it is zoifhin things, since  there  is 'absolute identity  o f   two atoms  in  the same quantitative state.' Well then? Convention, or objective reality?  The truth is  that  science is organized,  like  any  other  discourse,  on  the basis o f   a conventional logic, but it demands for its justification, like any other ideological discourse,  a  real  'objective'  reference,  in  a process o f   substance. If the  principle  of identity is  somehow 'true,' even  at  the infinitesimal levelof two atoms, then theentireconventional edifice  o f science  that  derives  its  inspiration from that level is a1so'true.'  The  hypothesis of the  genetic  code, DNA,  is also  true  and unsurpassable.  So it  goes  with  metaphysics.

Science accounts for things previously encircled and  formalized  so as  to be  sure  to obey it. 'Objectivity' is nothing else than that, and the ethic  which  comes  to sanction this  objective knowlegde  is  nothing less than  a  system  of defense and imposed ignorance, whose goal is to preserve this vicious  circle intact. 2

'Down  with  all  hypotheses  that  have allowed the  belief in a true  world,' said Nietzsche.

## The Tactile and  the Digital

This regulation on  the  model  of the genetic code is not at all limited to laboratory effects  or  to  the  exaltedvisions  of theoreticians. Banal, everyday life is invested by these models.  Digitality  is with  us.  It is  that which haunts  all  the  messages,  all  the signs of  our societies. The most concrete form you see it in is  that of  the test, of  the questiodanswer, of the stimuluslresponse. An content is  neutralized by a  continual  procedure  of directed interrogation,  of  verdicts  and  ultimatums  to decode,  which  no longer  arise this time from the depths o f   the  genetic  code  but that have  the same tactical indeterminacy-the cycle o f   sense

being infinitely shortened into  that o f  question/ answer,  of  bit  or  minute quantity  o f   energy/ information coming back to its beginning, the cycle only describing the perpetual reactualization of  the same models. The equivalent o f   the total neutralization o f   the  signified by the code is  the  instantaneousness of:  the  verdict  o f fashion, or of any advertising or media message. Any place where the offer swallows up the demand, where the question assimilates the answer, or absorbs and regurgitates it in a decodable form, or invents and anticipates it in a predictible form.  Everywhere the  same "scenario," the scenario  of"trial anderroi(guinea pigs in laboratory experiments), the scenario o f the breadth o f   choice offered everywhere ("the personality  test")-everywhere the  test  funcctions  as  a  fundamental  form  of control, by means o f   the infinite divisibility o f   practices and responses.

We live by the mode of referendum precisely because there is no longer any referenfial. Every sign, every message (objects  of"functional"use as well as any item o f  fashion or televised news, poll or electoral consultation) is presented to us as  questionlanswer. The  entire  system  of communication  has  passed  from  that  of a

syntactically complex language structure to a binary sign  system  o f questiodanswer-of perpetual test. Now tests and referenda are, we know, perfect forms of simulation: the answer is  called forth by the question, it i s  design-ated in advance. The referendum  i s alroqs an ultimatum: the unilateral  nature  o f the question,  that  is  no longer exactly an interrogation, but the immediate imposition of  a sense whereby  the cycle is suddenly compIeted. Every message is a verdict,  just  like  the  one  that  comes  from polling  statistics. The simulacrum o f   distance (or  even  o f contradiction  between  the two poles)  is  only-like the effect  o f   the real the sign seems to emit-a tactical hallucination.

Benjamin analyzes concretely, on the  level of   the technical instrument,  this operation o f the test:

The performance of the movie actor is transmitted  to the public by  means o f   an array  of technical instruments, with  a twofold  consequence.  The  camera  that presents the performance of the film actor t o   t h e   public need not  respect theperformance as an integral whole. Guided by the cameraman, the camera continually changes its position with respect to the performance. The sequence of  positional views which the

editor composes  from the material supplied him constitutes the completed film. .  . Hence, the performance of the actor is subjected to a series of optical tests. This  is the  first consequence  of the  fact that  the  actor's performance  is  presented by means of  the camera. Also, the film actor lacks the opportunity o f   the  stage actor to  adjust to  the audience  during  the performance,  since  he does  not  present his  performance  to  the audience in person.This permits theaudience to  take  the  position  o f the  critic,  without experiencing  any  personal  contact with  the actor. The audience's  identification with the actor  is really  an  identification  with  the camera. Consequently the audience takes the position of   the camera its approach is that o f testing.

Note The expansion of   the field of  the testable which mechanical equipment brings about for the  actor corresponds to  the extraordinary  expansion  o f the field o f   the testable  brought  about f o r the  individual through  economic  conditions.  Thus, vocational aptitude tests become constantly more important.  What  matters  in  these tests are segmental  performances  o f the  individual. The film shot and thevocational aptitude test are taken before a committee o f   experts. The camera director in the studio occupies a place identical with that o f the examiner  during

aptitude  tests.  (Translated  by  H. Zohn in Illuminatias, f r o m 'The Work of Art i n the Age of   Mechanical Reproduction.')

'The  work  of art  with  the  dadaists beco,mes  a  projectile.  It  plunges  in  on  the spectator,  it  takes  on a  tactile quality. The diverging element  in film  is also first-andforemost a tactile element, based effectually on the constant change o f   place and camera angles that stimulate the spectator.'

No contemplation is possible. The images fragment perception into successive  sequences, into  stimuli  toward  which  there can  be  only instantaneous response, yes o r n e t h e   limit o f an abbreviated reaction. Film no longer allows you to  question. It  questions  you, and  directly.  It is  in this sense that the modern media call for, according to McLuhan, 3 a  greater  degree o f immediate participation, an incessant response, a total plasticity (Benjamin  compares the work of the  cameraman  to  that  of the  surgeon: tactility  and  manipulation).  The  role  o f the message is  no longer information,  but testing and polling, and finally control ('contra-role,'  in the  sense  that  all  your  answers  are already inscribed  in the  'role,'  on  the  antiapated registers o f   the  code).  Montage and  codification

demand,  in  effect, that  the receiver  construe and decode by  observing the same procedure whereby the work was assembled. The reading a  perpetual of the message  is then only examination o f   the code.

Every  image,  every. media  message,  but also any functional environmental object, is a test-that is  t o   say,  in  the  full  rigor  o f the  term,  liberating  response  mechanisms according  tostereotypesand analytic models. Today,  the object  is  no longer 'functional' in the  traditional  meaning  o f the  word.  it  no longer serves you, it fsfs you. It has nothing to do with the object o f   yesteryear, no more than does media news with a 'reality'  o f   facts. Both objects and information result  already from a selection,  a  montage,  from  a  point-of-view. They  have  already  tested 'reality,' and have asked only questions that 'answered  back to them.  They  have  broken  down  reality  into simple  elements  that  they  have  reassembled into scenarios o f   regulated oppositions, exactly in the same way that the  photographer imposes his contrasts,  lights, angles on his subject (any photographer wiU teff  you: you can  do anything, all you have to do i s  approach the  original from the right angle, at that right moment o r mood

that  will render  it  the ma t u m e r to  the instantaneous  test  o f the  instrument  and its code). It is exactly like the test o r the referendum  when  they translate a conflict or problem into a game of questiodanswer. And reality,  thus tested,  tests you according to the same grill: you decode it according  to the same code, inscribed within each message and object like a miniaturized genetic code.

All  is  presented  today  in  a  spread-out series, or as part of  a line o f   products, and this fact alone tests you already, because you are  obliged to  make  decisions.  This  a p proximates our general attitude toward the world  around us to that of  a reading, and to a selective  deciphering. We live less like  users than readers and selectors, reading cells. But nevertheless: by the same token you also  are constantly selectedand tested by the medium itself. Just like cutting out a sample for the ends of   the survey, the media frame and excise their message bundles, which are in  fact bundles o f selected  questions,  samples  o f their  audience. By  a circular operation of  experimental modification, o f   incessant interference, like a nervous input,  tactile  and  retractile,  that  explores  an o b j e c t   by means o f   brief  perceptive sequences,

until it has been localized and controlled. What the media  thereby localize and contrd are no real  and autonomous groups, but  samples, samples modelled socially and mentally by a barrage o f messages.  'Public  opinion' is  evidently the prettiest of these samples-not an unreal political substance, but one that is hyperreal-a fantastic  hyperreality  that lives on l y off of montage and test-manipulation.

The eruption o f   the binary scheme q u e tionlanswer is o f   an incalculable importance. I t renders inarticulate every discourse. I t  shortcircuits all that was, in a golden age cmme again, the  dialectic  o f signifier  and  signified,  o f a representing and a represented. It is the end o€ objects whose meaning would be function, and o f opin i o n s that 'representative' representatives would beable tovote for. It is theendof thereal interrogation to  which it was possible  to  answer (the end especially to unanswerable questions). This process has been entirely overthrown.  The contradictory process o f   true and false, o f   real and the imaginary, is abolished in this hyperreal logic  of-montage.  Michel T o r t , in  his book Infelligmce Quotient, analyzes  this quite  well: 'What is going to determine the answer to  the question is not the question as such in the form

i n   which it was posed, it i s  also  the  idea that the interrogated  subject  forms  about  the  most appropriate tactic to adopt  in  function o f   the concept he has formed about the expectations of the interrogator.' And  further.  'The artifact i s   something  else enti r e l y than  a  controlled transformation  of  the object for  the ends  of knowledge: it is a rude interference  with reality, at the end o f   which it i s   impossible  to  say what in reality can be objectively known and what is the result o f   technical intervention (medium). The I.Q. i s   an artifact.' No more true or false, because no moredistinguishable  hiatus  between question and response. In the light o f   the  tests, intelligence,  l i e   opinion-and  more generally the entire process of  meaning-is reduced to the'ability to  produce contrasting reactions  toa growing series of  adequate stimuli.'

This  entire  analysis  sends  us  back to McLuhan's formula:  'The  Medium  is the Message.' It is in effect the mediumthe very style of  montage,  o f   decoupage, o f   interpellation, solicitation, summation, by the mediumwhich  controls the pr - s of   meaning. And you understand why McLuhan saw in the era o f the  great  electronic media  an  era o f tactile communication. We are closer here in effect to

the  tactile  than to the visual universe, where the distancing is greater and reflection is always possible.  At  the same time as touch loses its sensorial, sensual value for us ("touching is an interaction o f   the senses rather than a simple contact o f   an o b j e c t with the skin"), it is possible that it returns as the strategy o f a universe o f communication-but  as the field o f tuch'le and ttutical simulation, where the message becomes "massage,"  tentacular  solicitation,  test.  Everywhere  you're tested,  palpated,  the  method  is "tactical," the sphere  o f communication  is "tactile." Without even speaking  o f   the  ideology o f   "contact,"  that is being pushed in all its forms as  a  substitute  for  social rapport,  there is  an entire social configuration  that  orbits around the test (the  questiodanswer cell)  as  around  the commandments of   the molecular code.

The  political sphere  entirely loses i t s specificity when it enters into the game of the media and public opinion polls, that is to  say into the sphere o f   the  integrated circuit o f   question/ answer. The electoral sphere is in any case the first great institution where social exchange is reduced to obtaining an answer. It is due  to  this sign-simplification  that  it  is  the  first  one  to become universal. Universal suffrage is the  first

of   the  mass-media. An thrmgh the 19th and 20th  centuries political  and economic practice merge  increasingly  into  the  same type of discourse. Propaganda  and advertising fuse in the  same  marketing  and  merchandising  o f obj&amp;ts and  ideologies.  This  convergence  o f language between the  economic and the political  is  furthermore what  marks a society such as ours, where 'political economy' is fuUy realized.  It  is  also by the same token i t s end, since  the two spheres  are  abolished  in  an entirely separate reality, or hyperreality, which is that  o f the  media.  There,  too,  there is  an elevation o f   each term to  a greater power, that of   the third-order  simulacra.

'That  many  regret  the  'corruption'  o f politics  by  the  media,  deploring that  TV  and public opinion polls have replaced so quickly the formation  o f opinion,  shows  only  that  they under st and nothing about politics.'

What  is  characteristic  o f this  phase  o f political hyperrealism is the necessary conjunc tion between the bipartite system and the  entry into  the  play  o f the  polls  as  mirror  o f this alternating equivalence of  the political game.

The polls are  located  in a  dimension  beyond all social produdia. They refer only to  a

## Jean Baudrillard

simulacrum  o f public  opinion. A  mirror of opinion analogous in its way to that o f  the  Gross National  Product:  imaginary mirror of the productive forces, without regard to  their social ends or lack  thereof.  What  is  essential i s   only that  "it" reproduces  itself.  The  same  as  for public  opinion:  what  is essential  is that  it shadow  itself  incessantly  in  its  own  image. Therein l i e s the secret of   mass representation. I t  i s   no longer necessary that anyone product an opinion,  all  that  is  needed  is  that  all reproduct public opinion, in the sense  that all opinions  get caught up in this kind o f  general equivalent,  and once  more  proceed from  it (reproduce  it, whatever  they  make  o f it, on  the  level  o f individual choice). For opinions as for material goods: production is dead, long live reproduction.

If McLuhan's  formula makes any sense it is certainly in this connection. 4 Public opinion is p r ercellmce at  the  same  time  medium  and message. And  the polls that  inform  it  are the incessant imposition o f   the  medium as message. In this sense they are  o f   the  same  nature as TV and the  electronic  media,  which we  have seen  are also only a perpetual game of questiodanswer, an instrument o f   perpetual polling.

The pons manipulate that which cannof be

decided. Do they  really  affect  the vote?  True, false? Do they give an exact pictureof reality, o r simple  tendencies, o r the  refraction  of this reality  in  a  hyperspace  o f   simulation  whose curve  even  is  unknown?  True, false, undecidable.  Their  most  sophisticated analyses leave room always for the reversibility o f   the hypotheses. Statistics i s  only casuistry.  This  undecidable  quality  is  proper  to any  process  o f simulation (see above, the cr i s i s of  indecision). The internal logic o f these  procedures (statistics, probability, operational cybernetics) is certainly rigorous  and  "scientific";  somehow though  it does  not  stick,  it  is  a  fabulous  fiction whose index of  refraction in any reality (trueor  false)  is nil.  This  is  even what gives these modp2s their forcefulness. But also it is this  which only leaves them, as truth, the paranoid projection tests of a case, o r of a group  which dreams  of a miraculous correspondance of  the real to their models, and therefore o f   an absolute  manipulation.

What is true of the  statistics  scenario  i s  also true  of  the regulated partition of  the political sphere: the alternation of  the forces in power, majoritylminority,  substitutive, etc On this limit  o f pure  representation, "that" no longer

## lean Bauddlard

represents anything. Politics die  o f  the  tmwellregulated game of  distinctive oppositions. The political sphere (and that o f   power in general) becomes empty. This is somehow the payment for  the  accomplishing  of the  political  class' desire  that o f   a perfect manipulation o f social representation. Surreptitiously and silently, all social  substance has  left  this  machine in  the very moment o f   its perfect reproduction

The same thing holds  true for the polls. The only ones who believe in them finally are the  members o f the political class,  just  as the only ones who really believe in advertising  and market  studies  are  the  marketeers  and  advertisers. This  is  not  because  they  are particularly stupid  (though that  we  can't  exdude either) but  because the polls  are homogenous with  the current functioning o f   politics. They take on a 'real' tactical value, they come into play as a factor in the regulation o f   the  political class according to its Own rules of  the game. I t therefore has reason to believe in them, and it believes.  But  who  else does,  really? It  is  the political  class'  burlesque  spectacle, hyperrepresentative  o f nothing  at all, that  people taste by way of  the polls and media. There is a jubilation proper to spectacular nullity, and the

last f o r m it takes i s  that o f statistical  amtemplation. This  is  accompanied always,  we know,  by a profound disappointment-the kind  o f di s illusion  that  the polls provoke in absorbing so utterly the public's  voice,  in short-arcuiting all process  of expression.  The  fasanation  they exercise is in accordance  with this neutralization by emptiness,  with  this  trance  they  create by anticipation o f   the image over all possible reality.

The problem  o f the pdls i s not at all that o f their objective influence. Just as for propaganda or publicity, their influence is negated by individual o r collective inertia or resistanoe. The problem  is the operational simulation that they institute over the  entire  spectrum  o f social practices: that o f   the progressive kumiazatia of a l l social substance, that  i s   the substitution  for blood  o f   the white lymph o f   media.

The questionlanswer cyde finds extension in all domains. YO; slowly find that the entire realm o f   inquiries, polls, and statistics needs to  be looked at again in relation to  this  radical  suspicion which falls  upon their methods. But theselfsame suspicion falls on ethnology. Unless yau  admit that the natives are perfect naturals, incapable o f simulation, the problem is the same  as here: the impossibility of obtaining for a dirdd question

any answer other  than simukfal (other  than reproducing the question). It isn't even certain that  you can interrogate plants,  animals,  nor even i n e r t matter in the exact scienoes with any chance o f "objective,, response. As to  the response  of  the  polled  to the  poll-takers,  the natives  to the ethnologist, the analyzed to the analyst,  you can be  sure that  the circularity is total: the  ones  questioned  always pretend to  be as the  question imagines and soliats them to be. transference fall today under  the sway o f   this stimulated, simulated-anticipated response, which is none other than the very model of the self-fulfilling  prophecy. 5 We come then  upon a strange paradox: the  word of the polled, the analyzed,  the natives,  is  irremediably shortcircuited and lost, and it is on the basis  o f   this foreclosure that  these respectwe disaplinesethnology, psychoanalysis,  sociology-are going to be able to  experience  such  marvelous growth.  But they become puffed-up on mere wind, h r it  is  i n   that res@ that the circular response of the po l l e d , the analyzed, the  natives is  all  the same a  challenge and a triumphant revenge. It is that they place the spotlight back on the question itself, isolate  it in offering  it the Even  psychoanalytic tran~feren~e and cxr~nter-

mirror o f   the  answer it was awaiting, and show it helpless to ever quit the  vicious cirde  which in fact is  that  o f   power. Just as in  the electoral system, in which the representatives no longer represent anything because they control  sowell the responses of the  electoral bo d y . But everything  has,  somehow,  eluded  the ruling class' grasp. This i s  why the dominated answer of   the natives is all the same a real response, a desperate vengeance: that o f   letting  power bury power.

The 'advanced  democratic'  systems  are stabilized on the formula o f   bxpartite alternation.  The monopoly in fact  remains  that o f   a homogenous political class, from left to right, but  it  must not be  exercised as such. The oneparty totalitarian regime is an unstable form-it defuses the political scene, it no longer assures the  feed-back  of  public  opinion,  the minimal flux in the integrated circuit which constitutes the transistorized poitical machine. Alternation, on  the  other  hand,  is  the end o f   the end of representation, so solicitation  i s   maximal, by dint o f   simple formal constraint, when you are approaching most nearly a perfect competitive equation between  the  two  parties. This  is logical.  Democracy  realizes  the  law  o f equi-

## Jean  Baudrillard

valence  in the  political  order. T h i s law  is accomplished in the back-and-forth  movement o f the  two  terms which reactivates their equivalence but  allows, by the minute difference, a public consensus to be formed and the cycle o f   representation tobe closed. Operational theatre, where the only play staged anymore is the fulginous reflection o f   political Reason. The 'free choice' o f   individuals, which  is the credo of democracy, leads in fact precisely to  the opposite the vote becomes functionally obligdq: i f it  i s   not legally;  it is by statistical constraint, the structure o f   alternation,  reinforced by the pons. 6 The vote becomes functionally aleufmy: when democracy attains an advanced formal stage, it distributes itself around equal  quotients (SOl50). The  vote  comes toresemble  a  Brownian movement  o f particles o r the  calculation  o f probabilities. It  is as  if everyone  voted by chance, o r monkeys voted.

At this point it makes no difference at all what  the  parties in power  are  expressing historically  and socially. It is neressaty even that they represent  nothing the fasanation o f   the game, the  polls, the  formal  and  statistical compulsion of  the game is all the greater.

'Classical' universal  suffrage already im-

plies  a  certain  neutralization  o f the  political field, i f   only by the  consensus on  the rules of   the game. But you can still distinguish therein the representatives from the represented, on the basis o f   a real social  antagonism o f  opinion.  It  i s the neutralization o f   this contradictory referent, under the sign o f   a public opinion from now on equal unto itself, mediated and homogenizedby anticipation (the polls) that will make alternation possible 'at the top': simulation o f opposition between two parties, absorption o f their  respective ob j e c t i v e s , reversibility o f   the entire  discourse  one  into  the  other. It is, beyond the representing and the represented, the pure form  o f representation-just as  simulation characterizes,  beyond  the  signifier  and  the signified, the pure form o f  the  political economy o f   the sign-exactly as the floating o f currency and its countable relations characterizes, beyond use and exchange value, beyond all substance  o f prduction,  the pure form of   value.

I t  might  appear  that  the historical move ment  o f capital  carries it from  one open competition  towards  oligopoly,  then  towards monopoly-that the  democratic  movement goes from  multiple parties  toward  bipartism, then  toward  the single party. Nothing o f   the

s o r t : oligopoly, or the current duopoly results from a fudicul  doubling of monopoly. In all domains duopoly is the final stage o f   monopoly. I t   is not the  public  will  (state intervention,  anti-trust laws, etc.) which breaks up  the monopoly o f  the market-it i s  the fact that any unitary system, if it  wishes  to  survive,  must  acquire  a binaty regulation. This  changes  nothing  as  far  as monopoly is concerned.  O n   the  contrary, power  is  absolute  only  if it is capable  o f diffraction into various equivalents, if  it knows how to take o f f so as to  put more on. This goes for brands o f   soapsuds as well as peaceful coexistence. You need two superpowers to keep the  universe  under  control:  a  single  empire would apmble o f   itself. And the  equilibrium  o f terror alone can allow a regulated opposition to be  established,  for  the  strategy  is  structural, never  atomic.  This  regulated  opposition  can furthermore be ramified into a more complex scenario.  The  matrix  remains  binary.  It  will never  again  be  a  matter  o f a  duel or open competitive struggle,  but  o f   couples o f   simultaneous opposition.

From the smallest disjunctive unity (questiodanswer particle)  up  to  the  great alternating systems  that  control  the  economy,  politics,

world co-existence, the matrix does not change it  is  always the OD, the binary scansion that i s affirmed as the metastableorhomeostaticbrmof the current systems. This is the nucleus o f   the simulation processes which dominate us. It can be  organized as  a play of  unstable variations, from polyvalence to tautology, without threatening the strategic bipolar form: it i s   the  divine form of  simulation.

Why are there two towers  at New York's World Trade Center? All of   Manhattan's great buildings were always  happy enough to  affront each  other  in  a  competitive verticality,  the result of which is an architectural panorama in the image of  the capitalist system: a pyramidal jungle,  all  the  buildings attacking each  other. The system profiled itself  in a celebrated image that you had o f   New York when you arrived there by boat.  This  image  has  completely changed in the last Few years. The effigy of the capitalist system has passed from the pyramid to the perforated c a r d Buildings are no longer obelisks, but lean one  upon the other4  no longer suspicious one of  the other,  like columns in a statistical graph. This new architecture incarnates a system that is no longer competitive, but /compatible,  and where competition has disap

peared for the benefit o f   the  correlations. (New York is  the  world's only city therefore  that retraces all along its history, and  with a prodigious fidelity and in all its scope, the  actual form  o f the  capitalistic  system-it changes instantly in function of the  latter. No  European city  d o e s so.)  This architectural graphism is  'that of the  monopoly; the  two  W.T.C.  towers, perfect parallelepipeds a  %-mile  high  on  a square base, perfectly balanced and  blind communicating vessels. The fact that there are two of   them signifies the end o f   all competition, the end o f   all original reference. Paradoxically, if there were only one, the monopoly would not be  incarnated,  because  we  have  seen  how  it stabilizes  on  a dual form. For the  sign  tobe  pure, it has to duplicate itself: it is the duplication o f the  sign  which  destroys  its  meaning.  This  is what  Andy  Warhol  demonstrates  also:  the multiple replicas o f   Marilyn's  face are there to show at the same time thedeath of theoriginal and the end of  representation. The two towers of   the W.T.C. are the  visible sign o f   the  closure of   the system in a vertigo o f   duplication, while the  other  skyscrapers  are each  of   them  the original moment of a system constantly transcending itself  in a perpetual Crisis and self-

challenge.

There  is  a  particular  fascination  in  this reduplication. As high as they are, higher than all the others, the two towers signify neverthe less the end o f  verticality.  They ignore  theother buildings, they are not o f   the  same  race, they no longer challenge them, nor comparethemselves to them, they look one into the other as into a mirror and culminate in this prestige of similitude. What they project is the idea o f   the model that they are  one for the other, and their twin  altitude presents  no longer any value o f transcendence.  They signify  only that the strategy o f   models and commutations wins out in the very heart o f   the  system itself-and New York is really the heart of it-over the traditional strategy o f   competition. The buildings o f   Rockefeller Center still direct their gaze one at the other into their glass or steel facades, in the city's infinite specularity. The  towers, on the other hand,  are  blind, and no longer have a facade. All referential o f   habitat, o f   the  facade as face, o f   interior and exterior, that you still find in  the  Chase  Manhattan  or  in  the  boldest mirror-buildings  o f   the W's, is  erased. At the same  time  as  the  rhetoric  o f verticality,  the rhetoric o f   the mirror  has disappeared. There

remains only a series closed  on  the  number two, just as  if architecture,  in  the  image  o f the system, proceeded only from an unchangeable genetic code, a definitive model.

## The Hyperrealism of

## Simulation

All of   this defines  a  digital  space, a magnetic field  for  the  code,  with  polarizations,  diffractions,  gravitations  o f   the models  and  always, always,  the  flux  o f the  smallest  disjunctive unities (the  questiodanswer cell, that i s  like the cybernetic  atom o f meaning). We  should compare thiskind o f   control  with thetraditional repressive space, the  police-space that still corresponded  to a sipihing violence. Space o f reactionary  conditioning that took  its inspiration  from  the  total  Pavlovian  disposition  o f programmed, repetitive aggressions, and which you  find again multiplied  in  scale in "hard s e l l " advertising  and in  the political propaganda of the 1 9 3 0 ' s . Raw industrial violence, aiming to induce  behaviors o f terror and  o f animal obeisance. All o f that no  longer has any meaning. The totalitarian, bureaucratic concentration is a scheme which dates from the era of the  merrantile  law  o f value.  The  system  o f

equivalences imposes in  effect  the form o f a general  equivalent, and thereforr the centralization o f   a global process. Archaic rationality compared  to  that  of  simulation; there  is  no longer a single  general equivalent, but a diffraction  o f models  that  plays  a  regulatory role. No  longer the  form  o f the  general equivalent,  but  that  o f   distinctive opposition. From injunction you pass to disjunction by the code,  from  the  ultimatum  you  pass to the solicitation,  from  the  required passivity  to models constructed all at once on the basis o f the  'active  response'  o f the  subject,  on  its implication, its 'ludic'  participation, etc., towards a total  environmental  model  made  out  o f incessant  spontaneous  responses of joyous feed-back and  irradiating contact. This  is  the 'concretization  of the  general  atmosphere,'' according  to  Nicolas Schoffer, the  great festival o f   Participation,  made out of myriads o f  stimuli, miniaturized tests,  infinitely divisible  question/ answers, all magnetized by a few great models in the luminous field of  the code.

Here comes the time of  the great Culture of   tactile communication, under the  sign o f  the technico-luminous  cinematic  space  o f total spatiedynamic theatre

This  is  a  completely  imaginary  contactworld o f   sensorial  mimetics  andtactile mysticism; it is essentially an entire ecology that is grafted on  this  universe  o f operational  simulation, multistimulation and multiresponse. We naturalize this incessant test of  successful  adaptation in  assimilating  it  into  animal  mimesis.  'The adaptation o f   animals to  the co l o r s and forms of their  milieu  is  a valid  phenomenon  for man' (Nicolas SchWer), and the same for Indians, with their 'innate sense o f   ecology'! Tropisms, mimetics, empathy:  the  complete  ecological Evangel  o f open  systems,  with  positive  or negative  feedback,  is  going  to rush  into this breech, with an  ideology  o f regulation by information which is only the avatar, according to a more flexible rationality, o f   Pavlov's reflex. So it  is  that  we graduate from  electreshock therapy  to  bodily  expression  as  a  means  of conditioning  mental  health.  Everywhere  the disposition of force and forcing yield to dispositions of  ambiance, with operationalization of  the notions of  need,  perception, desire, etc. Generalized ecology, mystique  o f the 'niche' and  of  the context,  milieu-simulation right  up to 'Centers o f   Esthetic and Cultural Re-Animation' foreseen in the VIIth Plan (why

not?)  and Center o f  Sexual  Leisure, constructed in the  form  of a  breast, that  will  offer a 'superior euphoria due  to  a pulsating ambiance.

.  .  . The workers from all classes will be able to penetrate into these stimulating centers.' Spatiodynamic fascination, like this 'total theatre' established 'according to a hyperbolic circular disposition turning around a cylindrical cone': no more scene, cut-off point, 0r'regard': end o f   the  spectacle  as well as o f  thespectacular, towards the  total  environmental,  fused  together, tactile, esthesia and no longer esthetics, etc. We can think of the  total theatre of Artaud only with black humor, his Theatre  o f   Cruelty, of   which  this  spatiodynamic simulaton is  only an abject caricature. Here cruelty is replaced by 'minimal and maximal stimulus thresholds,' by the invention of 'perceptive codes calculated on the basis  o f   saturation thresholds.'  Even  the good  old 'catharsis' o f the dassical theatre o f the passions has become today homeopathy by simulation. So goes creativity.

This also means the collapse o f   reality into hyperrealism,  in the minute duplication o f   the real, preferably on the basis o f another reproductive medium-advertising, photo, etc From medium to medium the  real is volatilized

it  becomes  an  allegory  o f death, but  it is reinforced by its  very  destruction;  it  becomes the real for the real, fetish o f  thelost object-no longer object o f   representation,  but ecstasy o f denegation and of its own ritual extermination: the hyperreal.

Realism had already begun this tendency. The rhetoric o f   the real already meant that the status of  the latter had been gravely menaced (the golden age is that of language's innocence, where  it  doesn't have  to  add  an  'effect  o f reality'  to  what  is said).  Surrealism  is still solidary with the realism it contests, but augments its intensity by setting it off  against the  imaginary.  The  hyperreal  represents  a much  more advanced phase, in the sense that even this contradiction between the  real  and  the imaginary  is  effaced.  The unreal is  no longer that  o f   dream or o f fantasy, of  a beyond or a within, it is that o f   a halluucinatoty  resemblanc~ of th rml with itself. To  exist from  the  crisis  o f representation,  you have to l o c k the real up in pure repetition. Before emerging in pop art and pictorial  neo-realism,  this  tendency  is  at work already in the new novel. The  project is already there  to  empty  out  the  real, extirpate  all psychology,  all  subjectivity,  to move  the real

back to  pure objectivity.  In fact this objectivity is only  that  of  the pure look-objectivity at last liberated from the object, that is nothing more than  the blind  relay  station o f   the look which sweeps over it. Circular seduction where you can detect easily  the unconsaous desire o f   no longer being visible at all.

This is  certainly  the impression that  the new novel leaves: this rage for eliding  sense  in a minute and blind reality. Syntax and semantics have disappeared-there  is nolongerapparition, but instead  subpoena  o f the  object,  severe interrogation of its scattered fragmentsneither  metaphor  nor  metonymy:  successive immanence under the policing structure of  the look.  This  'objective'  minuteness arouses  a vertigo o f   reality, a  vertigo o f  death on  thelimits of represen  ta  tion-f  or-  t  he-sake-of-represen tation. End of the old illusions of relief, perspective  and depth (spatial  and  psychological) bound to the perception o f   the object: it  is the entire  optic, the view become operational  on  the surface of things, it i s the look become molecular code o f   the object.

Several modalities of this vertigo of realistic simulation are possible

I.  The  deconstruction  of the  real  into details-closed paradigmatic  declension of  the object-flattening, linearity and seriality o f   the partial objects.

II.  The  endlessly  reflected  vision:  all  the games of  duplication and reduplication  of  the object in detail. This multiplication is presented as a deepening, that is for a critial metalanguage, and it was doubtless true in a reflexive configuration  of  the sign,  in  a dialectic of  the mirror.  From  now  on, though,  this  indefinite refraction is only another type of  seriality. The real  is  no longer  reflected,  instead  it  feeds off itself  till  the point  o f   emaciation.

m. The  properly serial form (Andy  Warhol). Here  not  only  the  syntagmatic  dimension  is abolished,  but  the paradigmatic as well. Since there no longer is any formal flection or even internal reflection, but contiguity o f   t h e s a m e flection and reflection zero. Like thosetwo twin sisters in a dirty picture  the charnel reality o f their bodies is erased by the resemblance. How to  invest your energies in one, when her beauty is  immediately  duplicated by the other? The regard  can go only  from one to the other, all vision  is  locked  into  this  coming-and-going. Subtle way o f   murdering the original, but also

singular  seduction,  where all  attention to the object  is  intercepted by its  infinite  diffraction into  itself  (inverted  scenario  of the  Platonic myth of  the reunion of the separated halves of the symbol-here the  sign multiplies like protozoans). This  seduction  is possibly  that of death, in the sense that for sexual beings, death is  possibly not  nothingness,  but  simply  the mode of reproduction  anterior  to the sexual. This  generation by model  along  an  endless chain that in effect recalls the  protozoans and is opposed  to  a  sexual  mode that  we  tend, inaccurately, to confuse with life itself.

AI. But this pure mechanization is doubtless only  a  paradoxical  limit:  the  true  generating formula, that which englobes all theothers, and which i s somehow the stabilized form of  the code,  is  that o f   binarity,  o f   digitality. Not pure repetition, but the minimal sepxation, the least amount  of  inflection between  the two terms, that i s to  say  the  'very  smallest  common paradigm'  that the  fiction  o f sense  could possibly  support. Combination  o f   differentiation  internal to the pictorial object and to the object o f   consummation, this simulation retreats in  contemporary  art  to be  no mo r e than the

## Jean Baudrillard

minute difference that still separates the hyperreal from hyperpainting. The latter pretends  to  extend  right up  to  a  sacrificial effacement before the real, but you know how all these prestigious elements in painting resuscitate in this minute  difference:  all  o f painting takes refuge  in the border that separates the painted surface and the  wall. And in  the signature metaphysical sign o f   painting and o f   the whole metaphysic of representation, at the limit where it takes itself  for model (the "pure look'') and turns back  upon itself  in the compulsive repetition o f   the code.

The very  definition of the  real  becomes: that of which it i s possible to  give an equivalent reproduction. This  is  contemporaneous  with  a science  that  postulates  that  a  process  CM be perfectly reproduced in aset of  given  conditions, and  also  with  the  industrial  rationality  that postulates  a  universal  system  of  equivalency (classical representation is not equivalence, it is transcription,  interpretation,  commentary). At the limit o f   this process of  reproductibility, the real is not only what can be reproduced, but that which  is  always  already  reproduced. The hyperreal.

And so: end of  the real, and end of  art, by total absorption one  into the other?  No:

hyperrealism is the limit o f   art, and o f   the real, by respective  exchange,  on  the  level  o f   the simulacrum, o f   the  privileges and the  prejudices which are their basis. The hyperreal transcends representation  (cf.  J.F.  Lyotard, L'Att ViDmt, number  on  hyperrealism)  only  because  it  is entirely in simulation. The  tourniquet  of representation tightens madly, but o f an implosive  madness,  that, far  from  eccentric (marginal)  inclines  towards  the  center  to its own  infinite repetition.  Analogous to  the distancing  characteristic  o f the dream, that makes us say that we are only dreaming; but this is only the  game  o f censure  and  o f perpetuation  o f the  dream.  Hyperrealism  is made an integral part o f   a coded reality that it perpetuates,  and for which it changes nothing.

In  fact, .we  should  turn  our  definition o f hyperrealism inside out It is mIi t y ikelf today that is hypmmlist. Surrealism's  secret already was that the most banal rrality could become surreal, but only  in certain privileged moments  that nevertheless are still connected with art and the imaginary. Today it is quotidian reality in its entirety-political, social, historical and economic-that from  now  on  incorporates  the simulatory dimension o f   hyperrealism. We live

everywhere already in an 'esthetic'  hallucination of reality, The old slogan 'truth is stranger than fiction,' that  still corresponded to the surrealist phase of  this estheticization of  life,  is  obsolete. There is no more fiction that life could possibly confront,  even  victoriously-it is reality  itself that  disappears utterly  in the game o f   realityradical disenchantment,  the cool and cybernetic phase following the hot stage of  fantasy.

It is  thus  that  for guilt, anguish and death there can be substituted the total joy o f   the  signs of  guilt, despair, violence and death.  I t   is the  very euphoria  o f simulation,  that  sees  itself  as  the abolition of  cause and effect, the beginning and the end, for all o f   which it substitutes rrduplication.  In  this  manner all  closed  systems protect themselves  at  the  same  time  from  the  referential-as well as from all metalanguage that the system  forestalls  in  playing  at  its  own  metalanguage; that is to say in duplicating itself  in its own critique of  itself. In simulation,  the metalinguistic  illusion  duplicates  and  completes the referential illusion (pathetic hallucination of  the sign and pathetic hallucination o f   the real).

adages, old sayings are now

'It's a circus,''It's theatre,''It's a movie,' old naturalistic  denunciation.  These obsolete. The problem now is

that o f   the de!!iurrion of the  rad, the putting into orbit o f   an indefinable reality without common measure to  the fantasies that once used to  ornament it. This satellization  we find further naturalized  in  the  two-rooms-kitchen  shower  that they have launched into orbit-to the powers o f space, you could say-with thelast lunar  module. The banality o f   the earthly habitat lifted to the rankof cosmic value, o f   absdute decor-hypostatized in space-this is the  end  o f   metaphysics, the era o f   hyperreality  that  begins. 8 But the spatial transcendence o f   the  banality o f   the tworooms, like its cool and mechanical figuration o f hyperrealism, 9 says only  one thing.  that  this module, such as it is, participates in a hyperspace  o f representation-where each  is already technically in possession o f   the  instantaneous reproduction o f   his own life, where the pilots o f   the Tupolev that crashed at Bourget could see themselves  die  live  on  their own camera. This  is  nothing  else  that  the shortcircuit of   the response by the question in the test,  instantaneous process o f reconduction whereby  reality  is  immediately  contaminated by its simulacrum.

There used to  be, before, a specific class o f allegorical  and  slightly  diabolical objects: mir-

Tors, images, works of art (concepts?)simulacra,  but  transparent  and manifest  (you didn't confuse the  counterfeit with theoriginal), that  had  their  characteristic  style  and savoirfaire.  And  pleasure  consisted  then  rather  in discovering the 'natural' in what was artificial and counterfeit. Today, when the real and the imaginary are  confused in the  same  operational totality,  the esthetic fascination i s   everywhere. I t   is  a  subliminal  perception  (a  sort  o f sixth sense) o f   deception,  montage,  scenaria-of the overexposed reality in the  light o f   the  modelsno longer  a  production  space,  but  a  reading strip,  strip o f   coding and decoding, magnetized by the signs-esthetic reality-no longer by the premeditation  and the distance o f   art, but by its elevation  to  the  second  level,  to the second power, by the anticipation and the  immanence of   the code. A kind o f   non-intentional  parody hovers Over everything, o f   technical simulation, of  indefinable  fame  to which  is  attached an esthetic pleasure,  that very one of  reading and of   the rules of  the  game. Travelling o f  signs, the media, of  fashion and the models, o f   the blind and brilliant ambiance of  the simulacra.

A long time ago art prefigured this turning which is that today o f  daily life. Very quickly the

work turns back on itself as the  manipulation o f the signs of art: over-signification of art, 'academism  o f the signifier,'  as Levi-S  trauss would say, who interprets it really as the formsign. IS is then that art enters into its indefinite reproduction: all that reduplicates itself, even if  it be  the everyday  and banal reality,  falls by the token under the  sign  o f art,  and  becomes esthetic.  It's the  same  thing  for  production, which  you  could  say  is  entering  today  this esthetic reduplication,  this phase when, expelling all content and finality, it becomes somehow  abstract  and  non-figurative.  I t  expresses then  the  pure form of  production,  it takes upon itself, as art,  the value o f   a finality without  purpose.  Art  and  industry  can  then exchange their signs. Art can become  a reproducing  machine (Andy Warhol), without ceasing to be  art,  since the machine is  only  a sign. And production can lose all social finality SO as  to be  verified  and exalted finally  in  the prestigious, hyperbolic signs that are the great industrial combines, the 1/4-milehigh  towers or the number mysteries o f   the GNP.

And so  art is'everywhere, since artifice  is at the very heart of reality. And so  art is dead, not only because its critical transcendence is gone,

## Jean Baudrillqrd

but because reality itself, entirely impregnated by an aesthetic  which  is  inseparable  from its own structure, has been confused with its own image. Reality no longer has the  time to  takeon the  appearance  of  reality.  It  no  longer  wen surpasses fiction: it captures every dream wen before  it takes on the appearance o f   a dream. Schizophrenic vertigo of  these serial signs, for which no counterfeit, no sublimation is possible, immanent  in  their  repetition-who could say what  the reality  is  that  these signs  simulate? They no longer even repress anything (which is why,  if  you  will,  simulation  pushes us close to the  sphere  of psychosis).  Even  the  primary processes are  abolished  in  them.  The  mol universe o f   digitality has absorbed the  world of metaphor  and  metonymy.  The  principle  o f simulation  wins  out  over the reality  prinaple just as over the principle of  pleasure.

Translatd by

PhiIip  Beifchman

## Nofes

1. Counterfeit  and  reproduction  imply  always  an anguish, a disquieting foreignness: the uneasiness before the photograph, considered like a witches trick-and more generally before any technical apparatus, which is always  an  apparatus  of reproduction, is related by Benjamin  to  the  uneasiness  before  the  mirror-image. There is already sorcery at work in the mirror. But how much more so  when this image can be detached from the mirror and be transported, stocked,  reproduced at will (cf. ThtStudPnt ofPrugue, where the devil detaches the image of the student from the mirror and harrasses him to death by the  intermediary  o f this  image). AU reproduction implies therefore a kind o f   black magic, from the fact of being  seduced by one's  own  image  in  the water,  like Narcissus,  to  being  haunted by the double  and,  who knows, to the mortal turning back o f   this vast technical apparatus secreted today by man as his own image (the narcissistic  mirage  of' technique,  McLuhan)  and  that returns to him,  cancelled and distorted-endless reproduction  o f himself  and  his  power  fo the limits o f   the world.  Reproduction  is  diabolical in  its very  essence; it makes something fundamental vacillate. This has hardly changed for us:  simulation (that we describe here as the operation of  the d e )   is  still and always the place of  a gigantic  enterprise  of manipulation,  o f control  and  o f death,  just  like the imitative object (primitive statuette, image of  photo) always had as objective an operation of black  image.

2. There is furthermore in Monoci's book a flagrant contradiction, which reflects the ambiguity of all current science. His discourse concerns the code, that is thethirdorder simulacra, but it does sostill according  to"scientific" schemes o f   the second-order-objectiveness, 'scientific" ethic  o f knowledge,  science's principle  o f truth  and transcendence. All things incompatible with the indeterminable models o f   the t  hird-order.

3. "It's  the Feeble 'definition' of TV which condemns its spectator to  rearranging the few points retained into  a kind  o f abstract  work. He participates  suddenly  in  the aeation  o f   a reality that was only just presented to  him in dots:  the  television  watcher  is  in  the  position  o f an individual who is  asked to project his own fantasies on inkblots  that  are not  supposed  to represent  anything." TV as perpetual Rorshach test. And furthermore "The TV image requires each instant that we'close' the spaces in the mesh by a convulsive sensuous participation  that is profoundly  kinetic and tactile."

4."TheMedium  is theMessage"isthevery sloganof the poitical economy of the sign, when it enters into the third-order simulation-the distinction  between  the medium and the message characterizes instead signification of  the second-order.

5. The  entire  current  "psychological"  situation  is characterized by this short-circuit.

Doesn't emancipation  of children  and  teenagers, once the  initial phase o f   revolt is passed andonce there has been established the pn.nriple of   the right  to emancipation, seem like  the real emancipation of parents. And the  young (students, high-schoolers,  adolescents) seem to  senseit in

## The Order of Simulacra

their  always more  insistent  demand  (though  still  as paradoxical) for the presence and advice of   parents or of teachers. Alone at last, free and responsible, it seemed to them suddenly that other p p l e   possibly have  absconded with their true liberty. Therefore, there  is no  question o f 'leaving them be.'They're going to hassle  them, not with any emotional or material spontaneous demand,  but with an exigency that has been premeditated and corrected by an implicit oedipal knowledge. Hyperdependence (much greater than before)  distorted by irony and refusal, p m d y of libidinow original  mechanisms.  Demand without content, without referent, unjustified, but for all that all the  more severe-naked demand with  no  possible  answer. The contents o f   knowledge (teaching)  or  o f   affective  relations, the  pedagogical o r familial referent having been eliminated  in  the  act  of emancipation,  there  remains  only  a demand linked to the empty form o f   the institutionperverse  demand,  and  for  that  reason  all  the  more obstinate.  'Transferable'  desire  (that  is  to  say  nonreferential, un-referential),  desire that  has been  fed by lack, by the.place left vacant, 'liberated,'  desire captured in  its  own vertiginous  image,  desire of  desire, as pure form,  hyperreal. Deprived  of symbolic  substance,  it doubles back upon itself, draws i t s energy from its own reflection  and  its  disappointment  with  itself.  This  is literally today the'demand,' and it is obvious that unlike the 'classical' objective or transferable relations this one here is insoluble and interminable.

Simulated Oedipus.

Francois  Richard  'Students  asked  to  be  seduced either bodily o r verbally. But also they are aware o f   this

## Jean Baudrillard

and  they play the  game,  ironically.  'Give  us  your knowledge,  your  presence,  you  have  the word,  speak, you are there for that.' Contestation  certainly, but not only: the more authority i s  contested, vilified, the greater the need for  authority as such.They play at  Oedipus also, to deny  it  all  the more  vehemently.  The 'teach',  he's Daddy, they say; it's fun, you play at incest, malaise, the untouchable,  at being a tease-in order to desexualize finally.'  Like one under  analysis who asks for Oedipus back again, who tells the 'oedipal' stories,  who has the 'analytical'  dreams  to  satisfy the  supposed request of the analyst,  or to resist  him? In the same way the student goes through his oedipal number, his seduction number, gets  chummy,  close,  approaches,  dominates-but this isn't desire, it's simulation.  Oedipal  psychodrama  of simulation (neither  less real nor less dramatic for all that). Very different from the real libidinal stakes of knowledge and power or even o f   a real mourning for the absence of same (as  could have happened after'68 in theuniversities) Now we've reached the phase of desperate reproduction, and where  the  stakes are  nil, the  simulacrum i s maximal-exacerbated and parodied  simulation  at  one and  the same time-as interminable  as psychoanalysis and for the same reasons.

The interminable psychoanalysis.

There is  a whole chapter  to add to the history  o f transference and  countertransference: that of their liquidation by simulation,  of the  impossible  psychoanalysis because it i s   itself, from now on, that produces and reproduces the  unconscious as  its  institutional substance. Psychoanalysis dies also of the  exchangeof the

s i p o f the unconscious.  Just.as revolution  dies o f   the exchange of  the critical signs o f   political  economy. This short-circuit was well known toFreud in the form o f   the gift  of  the  analytic  dream,  or  with  the 'uninformed' patients, in the  form  o f the  gift o f their  analytic knowledge. But this was still  interpreted as resistance, as detour,  and  did  not  put  fundamentally  into question either the process of analysis  or  the  principle  of transference.  It  i s   another  thing  entirely  when  the unconscious itself,  the  discourse  o f the  unconscious becomes unfindable-according t o  the same scenario of simulative anticipation that we have seen at work on all levels with the machines o f   the third order. The analysis then can  no  longer  end,  it becomes  logically  and historically interminable, since it stabilizes on a puppetsubstance of  reproduction, an unconscious  programmed on demand-an impossible-tcrbreak-through point around which the whole analysis is rearranged. The messages uf the unconsaous have been short-circuited by the psydwanalysis  'medium.'  This is libidinal hyperrealism. To the famous  categories  o f the  real,  the  symbolic  and  the imaginary, it is going to  be necessary to  add the  hyperreal, which captures andobstructs  the  functioningof thethree orders.

6. Athenian democracy, much more advanced than our own,  had  reached  the point  where the vote was considered  as  payment  for  a  service,  after  all  other repressive solutions had been tried and found wanting in order to insure a quorum.

7. In  this  sense  we  should  radically  criticize the projection that Levi-Strauss  makes o f   binary  structures

as  "anthropological" mental  structures  and  o f dual organization as the basic structure of  primitive society. The dualist form that Levi-Srauss would s o love to apply to primitive society i s   never anything less than our own structural logic. Our very  own code, that selfsame one that  we use  to dominate the "archaic"  societies. LeviStrauss has the kindness to slip this to them under the guise of   mental structures that are common to  the  whole human  race.  They  will  thereby  be  better  prepared  to receive the baptism of  the Occident.

8. The coefficient of  reality  is  proportional  to the imaginary in  reverse which  gives it  is  specific density. This is  true of  geographical and spatial exploration  also. When there is  no  more territory  virgin and therefore available for  the  imaginary,  when  the map covers the whole territory, then something like a principle  o f   reality disappears.  The conquest  o f space  constitutes  in  this sense  an  irreversible threshold in the direction o f   the  loss of   the eartly referential.  This is precisely the hemorrhage of   reality as  internal  coherence  o f   a  limited  universe  when its limits retreat infinitely.  The  conquest of space follows that  o f the  planet  as  the  same fantastic enterprise of extending  the  jurisdiction  of the  real-to carry  for example the f l a g , the technique, and the twerooms-andkitchen to the moon-same tentative to substantiate the concepts or to territorialize the unconsaous-the latter equals making the human race unreal, or to reversing it into a hyperreality o f   simulation.

9.  Or  that  o f the  metal-plated  caravan  or supermarket dear to hyperrealists, or Campbell's  Soup dear to Andy Warhol, or the Mona Lisa,  since she too has been

## The Orders of Simulacra

satellized around the planet, as absolute  model o f  earthly art, no longer a work of art but a planetary simulacrum where everyone  comes to  witness himself (really his own death) in the gaze o f   the future.

[Image removed]

[Image removed]

[Image removed]

[Image removed]